<pb n="17"/>
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="15"/>BOOK I.
CHAPTER I. 
THE AUTHOR['S APOLOGY]' TO HIM WHO ASKED HIM TO
SET [THE HISTORIES] DOWN IN WRITING."
In accordance with the causes which summoned us
to converse with each other from time to time, and the
histories of the holy men, praises of whom were stirred
up in us, and the glorious stories and rehearsings of
whose histories I was shewing forth before thee, O our
brother Abhd-isho, thy mind was filled with truth, and
thy tongue with the praise of the power Who made
them victorious, and Who moved His saints. And thy
wisdom offered to me earnest supplications, and helpful
persuasions and directions, to set down [my] stories of
holy men in writing, in order that their unwritten histories
might neither be forgotten nor sink into oblivion. And
[thou didst ask] me to give to thee written accounts

of them as a rich inheritance, and as an excellent loan,
that thy holiness might meditate upon them, and that
thy divine understanding might be sanctified thereby.
And although for some years past this wish hath never
been absent from thee, and thou wast diligently urging
me to do [this], sometimes with the living voice, and
" Literally 'the writing'. Here a
====
This apology has been published from the Vatican MS.
with a Latin translation by Assemânî B. O., iii. 1, pp. 464–466.
C
<pb n="18">
sometimes by many-lined epistles which thou wast send-
ing to me to the place where I was, in times past
I did not yield' to this thy entreaty. But at one time
I took refuge in the inexperience of my speech, and
at another [in the excuse] that there was no necessity"
for these histories [to be written], inasmuch as the
Catholic Church aboundeth in histories of holy men, even
as gardens are filled to overflowing with all kinds of
fruits, for what are these³ feeble repetitions of mine in
comparison with [other] books which speak of holy
men? Yet thy desire was not diminished, nor thy
ardour quenched, for by the intercession of others with
thy praiseworthy self, * thou didst specially <pb type="textAllignment"  n="16"/> and
promptly comes to the monastery in which I lived, together
with the sage and philosopher, the wise, and enlightened,
and excellent Rabban Paul, [who] very willingly joined
with thee on his own behalf in this exhortation. Thou
hast softened the clay of my understanding with the
gentle water of thy persuasion, and therefore since
I attribute all this thy earnestness to the Divine Will
I accept thy love's command with all willingness. And
behold, by the help of our Lord, I will make ready
to satisfy this thy desire with all the joyful care of
which thy honour is worthy, and I will expand my
speech to praise and glorify the ascetics and holy men
.ܐܬܪܡܝܬRead :
3 We should read here
* Reading, with Vat,
2
ܐܠܨܬܐ for ܐܠܨܬ݂ܐ
(as: 2000.
5 Literally "ye did come". Assemânî has.... sed intercessores
quaesivisti, tuque ipse vir laudatissime unàcum illus ad monaste-
rium, ubi degebam, utrique comparati meditatique venistis, maxime
vero doctissimus. . . . . Paulus.
, a rare word.
6
<pb n="19"/>
who have lived in thy holy Monastery of Bêth 'Abhê;
for to write down the things concerning them thou hast
persuaded me enough. And although I shall turn aside
from [the writings] of others, yet wherever it is neces-
sary, I shall add the record and narrative of others,
in order to piece together and to harmonize the
histories, which in this respect require methodical
arrangement, and consecutiveness of completing por-
tions, and also such repetitions as shew forth the style
and manner of the lives of the holy men concerning
whom thy holiness hath persuaded me to speak. Pray
then, with love, and readiness of mind, and good will,
and charity, that our Lord, in His grace, may grant a
completion to the praise of His Godhead!
CHAPTER II.
THE CAUSE OF THE HISTORIES.
When I directed³ my thoughts to travel along the
difficult path of the strict way of life of holy men, and to
bring to light the things concerning them with my mouth,
and my tongue, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="17"/> and my right hand, by the hand
of Christ, and by my beloved brethren, and also by
His living word which saith, "All things, whatsoever ye
shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive", and,
"All things are possible to him that believeth", I was
commanded to make Christ my leader and director.
ܝܐܦܝܣܕܢܝ for ܐܦܝܣܬܢܝ -
.'consecutive order“ ܣܕܪܐ ܡܠܚܡܐ is glossed in A by ܐܣܪܠ ܵܬ݂ܐ
4 St. Matthew xxi. 22.
2
3
A for A
5 St. Mark ix. 23.
<pb n="20"/>And since His treasury is open to faith, "Ask, and ye
shall receive; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall
be opened unto you," I will become a stranger unto
all doubt, and I will believe that His graciousness will
not repulse me, and that He will not shut the door of
His gift in my face, and that He will shew forth in
my ignorance a free and full gift beyond my merit*—
even³ as in times past His all-sufficient power made
manifest speech in the she-ass of the soothsayer,* out
of the course of her nature, ³-and that through me He
will display the glory of His saints, in the one case by
His working, in the other by the praise of His majesty,
for the glorification of excellent men is the glorification
of God Who made them victorious. For without Him
they are nothing, and are even like unto the tools of
a craft without the craftsman, and without Him they
are incapable of anything, and are like unto the clay
which can neither contend with him that mouldeth it, nor
can of its own self choose that it may be fashioned
according to its own will..
St. Matthew vii. 7.
ܫܘܝܘܬܝ t forܘܝܘܬܝ
.ܕܠܐܬܢܗ Hofmann prefers the reading 1
.
* I. e., Balaam,, (Numbers xxii. 28), the son of Beor,
who is described as a "Priest of idols" from Harran
in Mesopotamia. See Duval, Lex. Syr. auctore Bar Bahlule, col.
401, and Payne Smith, Thesaurus, col. 540. Zoroaster was called
the "second Balaam" because he prophesied concerning the stars;
see Budge, Book of the Bee, p. 82.
5 Literally 'above her nature'.
6 We must read 250, striking out . B reads, "the
instruments of the craft of the craftsman".
7
p-calp..
8 Read Do.
.ܝ Hofmann prefers the reading .ܘܓܒܐ for ܘܓܒܝܐ 9
<pb n="21"/>
Now, I am commanded' by the holy brethren
of the holy Monastery of Bêth 'Abhê, in which
I have ministered for many years, that of the written
and unwritten histories, and excellent stories of the
holy men who have lived therein, and have been
victorious, I should spin a thread of the stories
concerning them, formed of the matters omitted by
the compilers of written and unwritten histories, and
of a small selection of stories which I have heard from
approved and venerable men, with whom I have become
acquainted there, and that I should set forth in writing,
with much brevity, such accounts as I should find
scattered here and <pb type="textAllignment"  n="18"/> there in the narratives of
others, and in the ecclesiastical histories of ancient authors.
And since in the stories which are my own I do not
repeat untrue things, I shew forth the trustworthiness³
of theirs. And behold I will go into the gardens of
' An extract from this chapter (p. 17. 1. 15-p. 161. 2) has
been printed with a Latin translation in B. O., iii. 1. 466. col. 2.
2 The famous Monastery of Bêth 'Abhê was situated near
the town of Bêth 'Abhê (probably the Bithaba of Ptolemy vi. 1)
under Mount Niphates, (B. O., ii, p. 420, note 2) to the south
of Herpâ in Saphsaphâ, on a mountain, not far from the right
bank of the Great Zâb; it was founded by Bar-Ḥadh-be-shabbȧ,
and was afterwards greatly enlarged and became famous under
Jacob of Bêth 'Abhê (B. O., iii. 2, pp. 730 and 876). It was
one of the monasteries exempted from the jurisdiction of the
ܝܫܘܥ ܝܗܒ ܩܬܘܠܝܩܐ ܓܕܠܝܐ ܚܪܪ bishop by Ishd' -yahbh of Gédhála
sushi... Bart (Mai, Scriptorum veterum nova
collectio. t. x. Rome 1838, p. 296, col. I, at the foot), and was called
by the Nestorians who wrote in Arabic ↳ ↳ (B. O., ii, p. 420
note 2) or ↳ (Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 226, note 1798).
Bêth Abhê means "the house in the forest"; in I Kings vii. 2.
בֵּית־הַיָּעַר and בֵּית יַעַר and Isaiah xxii. 8 it is the rendering of
ܫܪܝܠܬܐ Read ܃
<pb n="22"/>their victorious deeds as into a field, and, as it were,
I will glean and gather up together the choice and
well-filled ears of corn, and I will pile up into one sheaf
the heap of their bundles, that from thence they may
go into the threshing-floors of hearing, and be ground
in the mill of discernment, and be kneaded in the
kneading-trough of belief, and be baked in the oven of
love, and laid as a glorious offering upon the altar of
the mind of the Holy of Holies. For it is said, "The
mind which journeyeth to and fro in its state of nature.
is able to perceive, and to see, and to believe the
glorious things of glorious men, and the accounts of
the contests of mighty warriors, at the same time
adding to its knowledge belief", even as spake he that
saith, "and to belief also, confidence; and to confidence,
excellence; and to excellence, righteousness; and to
righteousness also, holiness; and to holiness also, con-
stancy; and to constancy, hope; and to hope, stability;
and to stability, strength; and to strength, love; which
is the crown of the completion of the excellent things,
in which standeth our profession, and upon which is
laid the foundation of our doctrine." And all things
which have been, and which are, and which shall be,
inasmuch a we have not been spectators' of them, we
.ܡܕܒܚܐ ܗܘܢܐ Read -
2 "In the law is bound up faith, and in faith is true love
established". Wright, Aphraates, p. 11. 12. 13.
"A man
should first build his building upon the rock, which is Christ,
on the rock faith should be laid, and upon faith should the
whole building rise up." Wright, Aphraates, p. 11. 15, 16.
3 "To speak briefly, every thing is of the Spirit, and
the whole world of spiritual things is seen and perceived by
faith. For if we do not take faith in our souls, we shall be
<pb n="23"/>
must accept the saying concerning them in faith, for
without it no single one of the things which are related,
without seeing could we accept.
Now those who only in a small degree have them-
selves laboured in the virtues of holy men, and have
participated in the smallest degree in the great joy
which is bestowed upon prosperous toilers in the ascetic
life and upon discreet penitents, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="19"/> possess from within
a firm conviction concerning these things which is not
an external matter produced by misery and rumour,
inasmuch as experience has taught them that these
things which are stated are true.
Let the reader, then, perceive clearly, and let the
listener understand, that the things concerning holy
men which my narrative recounts are not vain imagin-
ations of my own, for I have collected the materials
for them from the things which have been said concerning
them in the living speech, and from the written state-
ments which I have found concerning them in the
histories and traditions of others. And I shall finish
the contest which I have undertaken at the wish of
my brethren, and shall add according to the inclination of
my opinion, those things which are accepted by discreet
able to understand nothing that is not visible, while for the
things which are visible faith is unnecessary, for the sight of
ܘܐܝܟ ܕܒܦܤܝܩܬܐ ܢܐܡܪ܆ ܕܟܠܡܕܡ ".the eye seeth them
ܕܪܘܚܐ ܗܘ. ܘܥܠܡܐ ܟܠܗ ܕܪ̈ܘܚܢܐ܆ ܗܝܡܢܘܬܐ ܡܪܓܫܐ
ܠܐ ܢܣܒܝܢ ܚܢܢ܆ ܡܕܡ
shin.
ܐܚܪܝܢ ܠܒܪ ܡܢ ܡܕܡ ܕܡܬܚܙܐ ܠܝܬ ܠܢ ܕܢܣܬܟܠ. ܘܠܗܠܝܢ
ܒܢܦܫܢ.
ܕܡܬܚܙܝܢ܆ ܗܝܡܢܘܬܐ ܠܐ ܡܬܒܥܝܐ. ܡܛܠ ܕܚܙܬܐ
.Philoxenus on Faith (Brit. Mus. MS ܕܥܝܢܐ ܚܙܝܐ ܠܗܝܢ܀
Add. 12,163, fol. 12a, col. 1).
<pb n="24"/>and prudent men, provided that they are not prejudicial
to the truth in any particular, not the wonderful signs
and miracles, and mighty deeds which these holy men
have wrought, but to speak as [each] occasion shall
require, and to add a word concerning each, one after
another, on the things which have been wrought by
them, and to arrange all these things, one after an-
other, in one consecutive order, a matter which
belongeth to the care of writers, and which the order
of historical works requireth. I shall not confound story
with story, or history with history, in such a manner
that the mind of the reader will become confused by
the mixture of matters, but I shall, with much brevity,
set down each narrative by, and to itself, that from³
here universal history may arise, and I shall add story
after story, in the form of chapters [each having] a
distinct number. I shall begin my history with Mâr
Abraham the Great, the father of the fathers of the
holy men whom I have made ready my words to praise,
as the cause of the effects and as the origin of the
orders of ascetics which have sprung up after him,.
even as the blessed Abraham is considered to be
the father of all nations," and Israel the father of the
Israelites, and Aaron the father of the priests.' And
I ask our Lord, through the prayers of Mar Abraham
and of the children of his holiness, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="20"/> and I beg
We should read, with BC .
* Lines 13-22 (text, p. 19) have been printed with a Latin
translation by Assemânî, B. O., iii. 1, p. 466. col. 2.
3 Read
No.
* Assemânî 'ut inde histo.iam universalem habeas'.
5 Genesis xvii. 5.
7 Exodus xxviii. I.
6 Genesis xlvi. 8.
<pb n="25"/>
and entreat Him to give me of His spirit, even as [He
gave] of the spirit of Moses to the elders of Israel,'
that I may hear and relate glorious things of Him;
that I may speak of the glorious things of Him in
His saints; that the hearing of the listeners may be
sanctified by the speech of my mouth; that His holy
name may be glorified by my polluted tongue; and that
author and scribe, reader and listener, confessor and
believer, may be woven the rope of glorious things for
His holy name for ever and ever.
CHAPTER III.
THE INTRODUCTION TO THE HISTORY.
In the everlasting knowledge of the wise Creator,
the elect are set apart, and the predestined are written
down for the kingdom of heaven. And the types of
the Divine government which were written by the
hand of Moses, testify that they indicated aforetime the
things which should happen and should be given at
the end, for the confirmation of the fore-knowledge of
the election of holiness³. For every matter of Christ
our Lord was plainly brought about thereby, and in-
asmuch as it was given from heaven, it was inscribed
on a rock in the face of heaven, for there, on mount
Sinai, being overshadowed by a cloud for forty days,
Moses wrote down the histories of the worlds which
had been, and the commandments which had been given
Numbers xi. 17, 25-29.
3 Hoffmann would read
man (Moses)".
2 Hoffmann would read
si.
"prophecy of the holy
d
<pb n="26"/>to the seed of Abraham." And there, by the glory
with which his face was clothed,' was it indicated that
virginity and holiness³ should spread abroad in later
times and be exalted.
And that thou mayest know that such is the case,
follow after the footsteps of the life and conversation
of Christ, and thou shalt find that He expounded <pb type="textAllignment"  n="21"/>
and taught this plainly to His Apostles in taking them
up to Mount Tâbhôr (Tabor), where He was changed to
glory (ie., transfigured) in their sight. And He commanded
the earth and it brought up Moses, and He beckoned
to the heavens and they brought down Elijah,* and
He shewed that the virginity and holiness which were
with Moses were counterparts of the virginity and
holiness which were with Shêm'ôn (Simon) in the heights
of His kingdom. And He made virginity and holiness
perfect for them at the time of His Ascension from
the earthly Shâlîm (Salem) to Jerusalem, the great
city which is in heaven, when He lifted up His holy
hands and blessed them, and commanded them, saying,
"Go ye forth and teach all nations, and baptize them in
the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, and teach them to keep everything which I have
commanded you; and behold I am with you all the
days in which the world maintaineth the course of its
generations"."
Exodus xxiv. 18.
2 Exodus xxxiv. 35.
3. "Virginity and holiness" here mean the ascetic life.
* This sentence has reference to Deut. xxxiv. 6 and 2 Kings
ii. II, where it is stated that Moses was buried in the earth,
and that Elijah went up to heaven in a chariot of fire.
ܡܥܕܡܐ ܠܫܘܠܡܗ ܕܥܠܡܐ takes the place of ܕܕܗܘܐ ܡܡܫ ܥܠܡܐ ܒܝܘܒܠܘܗܝ 3
of the Peshitta version of St. Matthew xxviii. 19,20.
<pb n="27"/>
Virginity and holiness then descended from hand
to hand among all nations, but especially among the
pious armies of monks that exist in all quarters of the
earth. And inasmuch as virginity and holiness were
established in the mountains, and handed down from
them,-by Moses in Mount Sinai," by Elijah in Mount
Carmel, by the blessed Elisha, 3 by the sons of the
Prophets, and by Saint John in the wilderness, by
those who were with Simon on Mount Tabor,' by the
Lord of the Prophets at the time of His fasting in the
wilderness,' and also at the time of His going up into
the Mount of Olives, 8- the ascetic fathers also went
forth into the wilderness and the mountains to preserve
the virginity and holiness which had been handed down
to them by the Apostles, and to do battle against
"principalities and powers, and with the evil spirits
which are under heaven"." And that the Spirits and
Will of God, which completed in the one case and
maketh perfect in the other, is one, one of the saints
testifieth, and saith, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="22"/> "The power which I have
seen abiding in baptism, which giveth adoption as sons,
and freedom, to those who are baptized, I have also
seen in the dress of a brother on the day in which
he received the garb of the solitary life, and it sanctified
him for his work."
Exodus xxiv. 18.
32 Kings ii. 15.
5 St. Matthew iii. 1.
7. St. Matthew iv. 2.
21 Kings xviii. 20. 21.
4 2 Kings ii. 3.
6 St. Matthew xvii. I.
8 St. Matthew xxiv. 3.
• Ephesians vi. 12. Gr. πρὸς τὰ πνευματικὰ τῆς πονηρίας
ἐν τοῖς ἐπουρανίοις.
10 Lines 10-18 (text p. 21) have been printed with a Latin
translation by Assemànî, B. O., iii. 1, p. 467, cols 1 and 2.
"Read (?).
<pb n="28"/>And that the venerable army of monks may not
be despised in thine eyes by reason of the [superior]
manner of life of the Prophets and Apostles, enter, in
thy mind, into the garden of their noble deeds and
triumphs, and there, as thou readest, thou shalt be able
to understand the greatness and excellence of this pure
and venerable habit of life. There shalt thou see Abbâ
Pawlê (Paul), who for seventy years, more or less, was
ministered unto by a bird like Elijah the Great; and
Abbâ Antônîs (Antonius) with a company of devils
standing before him in perfect subjection; and Abbâ
Pambo, who like Moses³ received the glory of the
image of Adam, and his face shone and became like
unto lightning, and he was like unto a king sitting
upon his throne; and Abba Silvanus;* and Abba
* See the Additional Notes at the end of this chapter.
21 Kings xvii. 6.
3 Exodus xxxiv. 29.
a
páxi
ܫܘܒܚܐ ܕܕܡܘܬܗ ܕܐܕܡ. ܩܐܙܕܗܝ ܦܪܨܘܦܗ. ܗܟܢܐ ܐܦ ܕܒܐ ܢܢܒܘ ܗܘܐ ܦܪܨܘܦܗ ܐܝܟ
for 2007
2000
ܣܝܠܘܢܐ. ܘܐܦ ܐܐ ܣܘܣܐܝܣ܀
"They say concerning Abba Pambô
that, as Moses received the glory of the likeness of Adam, and
' his face shone, so also was the face of Abbâ Pambô like
lightning, and that he was like a king sitting upon his throne.
Thus also were Abbâ Silvanus and Abbâ Sisoes". Paradise of
Palladius, fol. 279a, Sayings of the Fathers No. 5.
* Probably Silvanus the comedian whose life is given in
Tillemont, Mémoires, vii, pp. 88. 89. At the age of twenty he
became a monk in the Monastery of Pachomius the Great in the
Thebaïd, and for some time led an ascetic life with all diligence
and care, but little by little he became careless and finally
began to sing improper songs and to dance before the brethren,
ܟܕ ܕܝܢ ܙܒܢܐ ܩܠܝܠ ܥܒܪ. ܫܪܝ ܡܗܡ ܗܘܐ ܡܢ ܦܘܪܩܢܗ. ܐܝܟܢܐ ܕܢܨܒܐ ܡܢ ܠܡܙܕܠܠܘ
<pb n="29"/>
Susȧis (Sisoes); and Abbá Nastir who [served] in the
monastery; and Abba Arsánis' (Arsenius) who was clothed
with heavenly light; and another (?) [monk] whose cell
was light by night as by day. May we be sustained by
their prayers in the toilsome strife of their ascetic lives!
Pachomius (born A. D. 292, died about 348) rebuked him, and
threatened him with expulsion, but one Petronius interceded
for him with the angry abbot, and he was allowed to
remain. For eight years after this event he led a life of remark-
and died having ,ܩܘܡܬܐ ܫܪܝܢ ܩܢܠܝܗ ܠܐܓܘܢܐ ܘܐܢܝܚ ܚܝܘܗܝ able piety
acquired great renown for virtue. See Acta Sanctorum, May 14;
and Rosweyde, Vitae Patrum, Antwerp, 1615, p. 128.
A monk, a native of the Thebaid, who retired to the desert
of Scete after Antony's death. He employed his time in weaving
baskets. He finally lived in the mountain of Clysma where
Antony died, and was there visited by Ammon, Abbot of Raithe.
He died about A. D. 429, aged 62 years. See Butler, Lives
of the Saints, July 4; Acta Sanctorum, July 6; Cotelerius,
Ecclesiae Graecae Monumenta, ti, pp. 662-678; Rosweyde, Vitae
Patrum, p. 508, col. 2.
Perhaps the abbot referred to in Payne Smith, Thesaurus,
col. 2403. Many of his sayings are extant in the Paradise of Palladius.
3 Arsenius was born A. D. 354 and died about A. D. 449
-50. He was recommended by the Bishop of Rome to be
tutor to Arcadius and Honorius, sons of Theodosius, about
A. D. 383; at the age of 40 he retired from this service and
I went to Scete. He left Scete in 434, and lived for a time at
Troë near Memphis; shortly after he went to Canopus and lived
there until 444, when he returned to Troë where he ended his days.
See Cotelerius, Monumenta, 1. p. 353; Rosweyde, Vitae Patrum,
p. 506; Cave, Hist. Lit., vol. 11, p. 80; Butler, Lives of the
Saints, and Acta Sanctorum, July 19. For a work by him, see
Combefis, Auctarium Novissimum Bib. Pat., Paris, 1672, p. 301.
* The word is probably the corruption of a name.
pport
for
2007 2500 2007 also
*
of the Fathers by Palladius No. 5, fol. 2796.
ps 0007 02
of 2 Sayings
<pb n="30"/>ADDITIONAL NOTES TO BOOK I. CHAP. III.
PAUL.
Abbá Paul of Thebes, called by Jerome 'auctor vitae mo-
nasticae' is said to have retired to the Egyptian desert in the
Thebaid during the persecution of Decius and Valerian, A. D.
250, and to have made his dwelling-place in a cave at the
mouth of which were a palm tree and a spring of water. From
the age of 22, when he retired to the desert, until he was
43 years old he lived on the fruit of the palm tree, which
also supplied him with clothing; but afterwards, for the space
of 70 years, he was fed by a raven who brought him half a
loaf a day. Paul knew the Greek and Egyptian (i. e., Coptic)
languages. By the command of God he was visited by Saint
Antony, who discovered his cell by the light which shone from
it; on the occasion of this visit the raven brought a whole
loaf each day. This visit took place A. D. 341 (Tillemont,
Mémoires, viii. 34. col. 2, at the top). Antony borrowed a cloak
from Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, in which to bury Paul
(who by this desired to show that he belonged to the communion
of Athanasius), and inherited his palm leaf tunic which he wore
on great occasions. Paul died about A. D. 342, aged 113 years,
and his grave is said to have been dug by two lions. On the
dates of the birth and death of Paul see Tillemont, Mémoires,
vii. 308, and for the life of Paul see Butler, Lives of the Saints,
Jan. 15; Acta Sanctorum, Jan. 10; Jerome, Vit. St. Pauli; Ros-
weyde, Vitae Patrum, Antwerp, 1615 fol. p. 17; and Tille-
mont, Mémoires, vii. 55; and Verger, Vie de Saint Antoine,
Paris, 1890.
ANTONY.
Antony the Great was a native of the village of Coma,
which was situated near the town of Heracleopolis. He was
born about A. D. 251, and he died on Jan. 17, 356, aged 105
years. He probably knew the Coptic language, but it is tolerably
certain that he had no knowledge of Greek literature. Having
lost both parents about the year 270, he gave all his goods to
the poor, and retired to the desert at the age of 19; here he
<pb n="31"/>
stayed for 20 years. His food was bread and salt, his drink
water, and he never broke his fast until after sunset; he fasted
five days at a time, watched all night, and prayed until day-
break. He neither bathed nor anointed his body with oil, and
he lived for years in a tomb and ruined fort. When he was
55 years old he founded his first monastery in the mountains
to the east of the town of Aphroditopolis, but later he lived
on Mount Clysma, near the Red Sea. He begged that his body
might not be mummified, for he believed that Christ would
restore it to him, without blemish, on the day of the resurrection.
See Butler, Lives of the Saints, Jan. 17; Acta Sanctorum, Jan. 17;
Rosweyde, Vitae Patrum, p. 35; Tillemont, Mémoires, vii. 48 ff.;
Athanasius, In Vit. St. Anton.; Sozomen, Hist. Eccles., 1. 13;
Socrates, Hist. Eccles., 1. 21. For descriptions of the monastery
' near the Red Sea which now bears his name see Sicard,
Missions du Levant, t. v; pp. 122-200.
The following graphic description of Antony's temptation
by devils is given in the Syriac version of Palladius (fol. 176):
ܘܪ̈ܚܡܐ ܤܓܝܐܐ ܘܟܡܗܘܢ ܪ̈ܡܐ ܕܨܞܠܝܢ. ܘܡܞ ܗܝ ܫܥܬܐ ܐܬܛܝܒܬ ܘܩܡܬ ܘܐܪܝܡܬ ܩܠܝ
ܒܡܙܡܘܪ̈ܐ ܘܐܡܪܬ. ܕܗܠܝܢ ܒܡܪ̈ܟܒܬܐ ܘܗܠܝܢ ܒܪ̈ܡ ܘܚܢܢ ܒܡܗ ܕܡܪܝܐ ܐܠܗܢ ܢܫܢ.
<pb n="32"/>ܩܠܝܠ ܡܢ ܣܘܓܐܐ ܕܬܠܟ. ܒܪܡܐ ܐܢܬ ܓܝܪ. ܘܟܡܐ ܕܬܙܪܝܚ ܠܒܝܫ ܦܓܪܐ ܐܢܬ.
ܗ ܡܬܚܒ. ܘܣܡ ܥܠܝ ܣܛܢܐ ܒܡܚܪܬܐ ܩܫܝܬܐ. ܘܟܡܐ ܕܗܘ ܡܣܝܐ ܗܘܐ. ܐܬܐ ܒܩܠܐ
PAUL THE SIMPLE.
Paul the Simple was one of the most celebrated disciples
of Antony, and was considered to be the first disciple of that
saint. He was alive in 338. For his life see Tillemont, Mé-
moires, vii. pp. 66-99; and Sozomen, Hist. Eccles. i. 13. The
Syriac version of the account of his life by Palladius is as
follows (fol. 686):
ܘܪܐܚܪܢ ܟܕ ܣܥܪܝܢ ܛܢܦܘܬܐ. ܗܕܐ ܕܝܢ ܗܘܬ. ܐܝܟܢܐ ܕܛܝܒܘܬܐ ܬܓܪܗ ܠܦܘܠܐ
ܠܡܕܡ ܕܡܝܬܪ. ܟܕ ܕܝܢ ܚܙܐ ܐܢܘܢ. ܓܝܟ ܢܟܦܐܝܬ ܘܥܢܐ ܘܐܡܪ. ܫܦܝܪ ܫܦܝܪ ܩܪܝܠܐܝܬ ܕܠܝ
<pb n="33"/>
<pb n="34"/>ܘܐܡܪ ܠܗ. ܠܥܣ ܦܦܝܐ ܩܠܘܪܐ ܐܚܪܢܐ. ܐܡܪ ܠܗ ܦܘܠܐ. ܐܢ ܠܥܣ ܐܢܬ ܐܦ ܐܢܐ، ܐܢ ܕܝܢ
ܚܘܝܗܝ ܐܢܛܘܢܝܣܝ ܕܓܡܝܪܐܝܬ ܐܝܬܞ ܢܦܫܗ ܩܕܡ ܐܠܗܐ. ܘܦܫܝܛ ܠܒܪ ܡܢ ܡܫܘܚܬܐ.
ܠܫܡܝܐ ܡܨܥܪ ܗܘܐ ܘܡܓܟܦ. ܘܟܕ ܚܙܝܗܝ ܐܢܛܘܢܝܣ ܐܡܪ. ܗܢܐ ܠܐ ܗܘܐ ܕܐܣܝܘܗܝ.
<pb n="35"/>
PAMBO.
Pambo, TTéupw, TTaustus. the fiend of Macarius and Isidore,
I was famous for his labours, fasting and silence; he was a dis-
ciple of Saint Antony. He was visited by Melania the Elder
who found him making mats; he died about A. D. 393, aged
70 years. See Butler, Lives of the Saints, Sept. 6; Acta Sanc-
torum, July 1; Socrates, Hist. Eccles., iv. 23; Rosweyde, Vit. Pat.,
pp. 531,938; Tillemont, Mémoires, vii, p. 65. The Syriac version
of the account of his life by Palladius (fol. 55 b) is as follows: —
ܗܠܝܢ ܕܝܢ ܕܝܪ̈ܝܬܐ ܡܣܟܢܝܢ ܝܬܝܪܐܝܬ. ܘܦܩܕܗ ܕܠܐ ܢܸܬܼܠ ܠܐܐܫ ܕܥܡܪ ܒܡܨܪܝܢ. ܡܛܠ
<pb n="36"/>ܐܦ ܒܞܝܐ ܨܒܥܬܗ܀
<pb n="37"/>
CHAPTER IV.
OF THE BLESSED RABBAN MÂR ABRAHAM' THE GREAT, THE
HEAD OF THE MONASTERY IN MOUNT ÎZLÂ.³
Now as God of old brought out the blessed Abraham
from Or (Ur) of the Chaldees, and made him, by faith,
⚫ Abraham of Kashkar (al-Wäsit) or Ibrahim al-Kashkarâni,
the head and father of the hermits, is said to have been baptized
in the time of the Catholicus Bâbhai who died A. D. 502, and
he is described as an 'old man' when Sabhr-Isho' was
Catholicus A. D. 596-604. He was a student at Nisibis under
Abraham the nephew of Narsai. He went to Hertâ where he
converted some of the idolatrous natives, and afterwards visited
Egypt and Mount Sinai; he finally settled in Mount Izlå, and
became the founder of the famous monastery there "in quo
cœnobitarum Ægyptiorum mores omnes, atque adeò continentiam,
adamussim observari præcepit." (B. O., iii. 1. 93). He must
be distinguished from another Abraham of Kashkar who lived
at Hazzah, and who went to Jerusalem and Egypt; he returned
to Ḥazzah, near Arbêl in Adiabene, where he lived until his
death which took place thirty years later. He was distinguished
as a philosopher, and wrote a treatise on the monastic life which
was translated into Persian by his disciple John the monk. See
Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 172-173; Wright, Syriac Literature,
p. 837; B. O., iii. 1. 155, 431; . 2. 873. These two Abrahams.
are confounded by Assemâni in B. O., iii. 1. 154-
Mount Izlâ, the J of the Arabic writers (B. O., iii. 1.
155a), is situated on the southern edge of the mountain called
Túr Abhdin, about three farsal from Nisibis, and the river al-
Hirmas flows at its foot. In this mountain were four monasteries,
viz., the "Great Monastery" founded by Rabban Abraham; 'Umr
al-Za'farán (see Yakut . 663, and for other mon-
asteries of this name see Hoffmann Auszüge, note 1312, p. 169);
'Umr Mår Awgin (see B. O., iii, 1. 147, note 4); and 'Umr Mår
Yuhanna. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 167 ff.
3 Genesis xv. 7.
<pb n="38"/>the father of a multitude of nations, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="23"/> so also He spread
abroad and made to increase this holy habit of the solitary
life in all the country of the East, by the hand of [this]
spiritual man, worthy of Abraham in name, and country,
and deed, whom He established to be the father of
the army of virgins and men of abstinence. For thus
the ancients write concerning him, more particularly
Abba John, the writer of the 'History of Rabban Bar-
'Idta', and Rabban Rôsṭâm,³ of the Monastery of Bêth
Ķôka, in the History of Rabban Mâr Abraham, the
* Lines 4-18 (text p. 23) are quoted by Assemânî, B. O.,
iii. 1. pp. 93 col. 2, and 467 col. 2.
* Bar-'Idtà, i. e., 'the son of the church', the founder of the
monastery which bore his name, was a contemporary of Bâbhai
of Izlâ and Jacob of Bêth 'Abhê; he must be distinguished from
another Bar-'Idtâ, a monk in the Monastery of Şĕlîbhâ, near
the village of Haighlâ on the Tigris, who lived about 690, with
whom he has been confounded by Assemânî (B. O., iii. 1. 458).
He wrote a monastic history which is quoted with respect by
Thomas of Margà (Bk. i, cap. 23, text p. 47; cap. 34, text
p. 62; bk. ii, cap. 6, text p. 73 etc.). See Hoffmann, Auszüge,
p. 181, Wright, Syriac Literature, p. 838. The day of the
commemoration of Bar-Idtâ was the same as that of Jacob of
Bêth Abhê, Bar-Hadh-be-shabbâ, Ķâm-Isho', Aphrîm and
"their companions the founders of divine assemblies in the
country of Marga and Dâsen." Wright, Catalogue of the Syriac
MSS in the British Museum, p. 187, col. 2.
3 Rabban Rôsţâm or Rabban Sabhr-Îsho' was born in Herêm,
a village in Adiabene about the middle of the VIIth century;
his history entitled "Abraham of the Monastery of Rabban
Zěkhâ-Îsho" and other works are mentioned by Thomas of
Marga, Bk. ii, cap. 17, text p. 90. See also B. O., iii. I. 455.
* Also called the "Monastery of Sabhr-Îsho';" it was situated
near the Great Zâb in Adiabene. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, note
1715, p. 215.
<pb n="39"/>
head of the monastery of Rabban Zekha ishő,' of the
Monastery of Beth 'Abhê. Now these writers say that
he went to the desert of Eskite³ (Scete), where he
received and took upon himself the order of the ascetic
life. Afterwards, by the Divine command, he came
2
Zekhâ-Isho', Isho‘-Zěkhâ, or Meshîķâ-zěkhâ, when expelled
from Mount Izlâ by Bâbhai, the head of the monastery, went
to Dâsen (see Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 202–207) and founded
a monastery which was henceforth known as Bêth Rabban Zěkhâ
I sho' or Beth Rabban. Bêth Rabban and Bêth 'Abhê were
under one head; the former monastery seems to have been
built on a higher level in the mountains than the latter. Hoff-
mann, Auszüge, p. 206; Wright, Syriac Literature, p. 838.
2 Assemânî has
B. O., iii, 1. p. 93, col. 2, 1. 46.
the Desert ܕܓܠ ܕܢ ܟܫܐܝ or |ܠܚܫܝܪܐ ܐܣܣܝܛܣ ,ܐܣܣܝܛ ܖܐܣܩܛ 3
-the Nitre بركة النطرون the Nitre valley, or, وادى النطرون
of Abu Macarius' is the name given to the Nitrian valley
ميزان القلوب
From
lake), which is situated in Lat. 30° 19' N., Long 30° 16' E.
about thirty-five miles to the left of the most western branch
of the Nile; the Greeks called it Σκήτη or Σκήτης, the Muham
medans Wâdî Habib, the Copts SH 2HT, or HT, which is
said to mean "measure of the heart" and has been rendered
in Syriac by 2 Son, sau 2020000 or
the second century of this era Scete was the home of
monasticism; at the close of the fourth century Palladius estim-
ated that more than 5000 ascetics lived in this valley, and the
number at the end of the VIIth century is given as 3000.
See Wright, Preface to Catalogue of Syriac MSS, iii, p. ii;
Quatremère, Mémoires, i. p. 451 ff.; Migne, Vitae Patrum,
t. 73. coll. 231, 1098, 1101; and Jablonski, Opuscula, i. p. 312.
For descriptions of the Monasteries in this valley see Curzon,
Monasteries in the Levant, p. 90; Butler, Ancient Coptic Churches,
vol. i. p. 334-337; and Tischendorff, Reise in den Orient, i,
p. 110. In Mahmûd Bey's map of Egypt the valley joins the
spot where the caravan routes from Alexandria and Tripoli to
Cairo meet.
<pb n="40"/>and dwelt in a secret' cave in Mount Izlâ, in the
neighbourhood of the city of Něṣibhîn (Nisibis).*
And he speedily became known unto men, inasmuch
as he was ordained to be the cause of spiritual benefits
unto many, through the everlasting fore-knowledge of
Him who set him apart aforetime, that at his hands,
and by his means, the holy fathers who were to become
the founders of famous monasteries of the lands of the
Persians, and Assyrians, and Babylonians,³ might become
disciples. And the fame of his glorious deeds spread
abroad into every quarter, like the smell of choice
spices, and a multitude of ascetics were gathered to-
gether unto him. He invented this distinguishing mark
of ours, and commanded that the disciples of this holy
habit of life should have their heads shaved like a
crown; now before the days and time of his coming,
.ܡܛܪܬܐ for ܡܛܫܝܬܐ
is a very ancient city of Mesopotamia situated نصيبين ليستم 2
in a rich and fruitful country about 120 miles N. E. of Môșul
(Nineveh), and 50 miles N. of the western end of the Sinjâr
mountains; according to Ibn Batutah, (ed. Defrémery and San-
guinetti t. ii, p. 140) it is two days' journey from Gazîret ibn
'Omar on the Tigris. It is surrounded by the river Hirmâs
which flows in several channels through the city. According
to Yakut (iv, p. 787 ff.) it contained 40,000 gardens, and was
nine farsal from Sinjâr, and six days from Mosul.
3 I. e., Persia, and Northern and Southern Mesopotamia.
* Among the Nestorians two offices for the tonsure are in
use; the author of the older and shorter office is unknown, but
the author of the younger and fuller is Pethion a monk. Ac-
cording to the former, after fifty days' probation the candidate
is brought into the 'place of prayer', and Rabban having spread
a woollen tunic on the ground sets him upon it with his face to
the East, saying at the same time, "This tunic is the type of
the grave, and the world is already dead to thee." Rabban
<pb n="41"/>
the mark of the true Christians could not be distinguished
from the tonsure of the Séwaryânė (ie, followers of
Severus)." And as formerly everyone who wished
next cuts off the hair from the top of his head, leaving a space
like a "wheel and a crown," which he sprinkles with water,
saying, "Christ will wash away the impurity of thy sins." This
form of tonsure has been associated with St. Peter, and is often
called the Roman tonsure; the shaving of the whole head is
called the Greek tonsure, and is associated with St. Paul.
For the service of three years and three months in the monastery
before receiving the tonsure see Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 101,
note 907. In the Jacobite office "the priest takes some of the
hair from the front, and back, and each side of his head in the
ܤܢܐ ܫܠ ܡܢ ܤܥܠܗ ܡܢ ܩܕܡܘܗܝ ܘܡܢ ܒܣܬܪܗ ܘܡܢ ܗܢܐ 'form of a cross
.905 .Assemant, B. O., iü. 2, p ܓܬ ܘܡܢ ܗܢܐ ܒܛܘܦܤܐ ܕܨܠܝܡܐ
.ܣܘܪ̈ܝܢ̈ܐ ,ܣܘܪ̈ܝܢ̈ܐ f Assemani writes
I. e., Severus, Patriarch of Antioch A. D. 512-519. He
was born at Sozopolis in Pisidia, and in his early life practised
in the courts at Beyrut. He embraced the Monophysite doctrine
and became a monk in a monastery near Gaza; later he joined
a Eutychian brotherhood near Eleutheropolis under the direction
of Mamas. He was called 'Acephalus' and became the head of
the Acephalai 'Aképalo, or party of Monophysites who rejected
the Council of Chalcedon in 451 and the Henoticon of Zeno
promulgated in 482, and who separated themselves from Peter
Mongus the Patriarch of Alexandria. Severus held that Christ
was one, and that this personal unity embraced a divine and
human element, each of which he regarded as an essence or
substance rather than as a nature. (Smith and Wace, Dict.
Christ. Biog., iv. p. 315). Severus and Philoxenus of Mabbóg
were the founders of the Jacobite form of monasticism which
obtained in Egypt. Severus died in Egypt about 540. See
Assemâni, Dissert. de Monoph., B. O., ii, p. 9; Evagrius, Hist.
Eccles., 33; Bar-Hebraeus, Chron. Eccles., ed. Lamy and
Abbeloos, 1. coll. 188, 190, 194, 212; Labbe, Concilia, iv. 1461;
and Assemânî, B. O., iii. 1, p. 384.
3 The next six clauses are quoted in B. O., iii. 1. p. 94. col. 1.
f
<pb n="42"/>to learn and to become master of the heathen philo-
sophy of the Greeks went to Athens, the famous city
of philosophers, so in this case, every one who desired
to be instructed in spiritual philosophy went to the
holy Monastery of Rabban Mâr Abraham, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="24"/> and
inscribed himself in sonship to him. Thus after
many years, when the pursuit of the monastic life and
voluntary abstinence had greatly increased, and when,
during the lifetime of that holy man,³ fathers had gone
forth from his congregation, and had, like him, built
monasteries, he was gathered [to his fathers] in honour,
and went to incorruptible life.
CHAPTER V.
OF MAR DADH-ISHO+
Now this blessed man Dâdh-isho, who, according
to what we have learned from history concerning him,
became governor after Rabban Mâr Abraham, formerly
.ܘܒܒܪܘܬܐ Read -
.ܡܝܲܞܒ Read -
.ܘܡܢ ܚܝܘܗܝ ܕܝܠܗ ܕܦܪܨܘܦܐ Read 3
+ Dâdh-Isho' succeeded Mâr Abraham as head of the Mon-
astery of Mount Izlâ, probably during the life-time of Abraham,
at the end of the VIth or beginning of the VIIth century. He
wrote a commentary on the Paradise of the Western Monks,
probably meaning the Paradise of Palladius and Jerome, a dis-
course on the consecration of the cell, funeral sermons and epistles,
some works on the ascetic life, and annotations to the works
of Isaiah of Scete. The name means "gift of Jesus"
saxy. See Hoffmann, Auszüge. p. 173; Wright, Syriac Lit.,
p. 838; and B. O., iii. 1, p. 98, 99.
5 This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 98. col. 1.
<pb n="43"/>
lived in Dairà dhè Risha' (i. e., Monastery of the Head),
in this country of Marga,' with Rabban Estaphnos
(Stephen) the Great, who was famous and renowned
in all the East. When he had continued with him for
a period of seven years, he departed to Rabban Már
Abraham, and was, it is said, the first to come to
* A famous monastery of Margâ, in which, according to
Thomas of Margå "seven bishops (BC read 'seventy') dwelt at the
beginning." See Bk. vi. cap. 1. (text p. 328. ll. 10, 11, and note 6).
The position of the town of Margå cannot be fixed exactly,
but it was not far from Môşul in a N. E. direction; it is the
Marj el-Mausil or Marj Abů 'Obeida of the Arabic writers
مرح الموصل ويعرف بمرج ابي حبيده من جانبها الشرقى موضع
ة لا بين الجبال في مخفض من الارض سبية باغور فيه مروج وقرى
iv. p. 488. The province of Margå is partially represented by
that of Mår Abraham of Gunduk (see Badger, Nestorians and
their Rituals, vol. 1, p. 392), and had as its centre the province
of Nâukur; it must also have comprised the arable plain, which
forms an irregular parallelogram in shape, measuring twenty-
five miles by fifteen, which slopes down slightly from Gebel
Maklub and the hill of 'Ain eş-Şafra, and which is bounded
on the N. E. and E. by the Gomel and Hazir rivers, and on
the S. W. and S. E., by the Upper Zâb and Tigris. The
boundaries of the diocese of Margå were, on the N. the crest
of the Hair mountains, on the W. the Mezûri mountains, on
the E. Gebel Mår Daniel, on the N. E. Gebel Maklüb, on the
S. the Upper Zåb, on the S. E. a bend of the Hair mountains.
(Mâr Daniel is about 28 miles E. of Nineveh, and 'Ain eş-Şafra
six or eight miles N. W. of Mâr Daniel; the Church of Már
Daniel stands on the top of 'Ain eş-Şafra). Margå is called
'village', by Bar-Hebraeus (Chron. ed. Bruns p. 517. L. 7,
ed. Bedjan p. 492. 1. 15). Margâ must be distinguished from
"The hill on which Már Daniel, another old Christian Church, is
situated, and of which it occupies the highest and central point, is abrupt
on its western and sloping on its eastern side." "The river Gomel, about
as large as the Khozer, falls into the âzir (near Már Mattail, which in turn
falls into the Upper Záb." Rich, Narrative, vol. 2, p. So.
<pb n="44"/>him. And he ministered unto him a long time, and
after Mår Abraham had departed from this mortal life
to that of peace, Mâr Dâdh-Isho' became the head and
governor of the monastery after him. And the historians
magnify him and say that in respect of the humility
which he possessed, and his despising of self, and his
abstinence and asceticism, he surpassed all others of
his time. And the name and glory of his godly habits
of life was, like that of his master, carried into all
places, and by his means that holy convent flourished,
and increased in holy men who became his disciples.
CHAPTER VI.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="25"/> OF OUR RABBAN MAR JACOB OF BETH-ABHE.
Now this holy man Rabban Jacob sprang from the
town of Lâshôm' of Bêth-Garmai." And having dwelt
Maragaha city of Adhôrbàîjàn, with which it is some-
times confounded by Assemânî, (B. O., iii. 2, p. 752). See
Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 222-227 and the authorities quoted
by him; Rich, Narrative of a Residence in Koordistan, vol. 2,
pp. 72, 80; and Felix Jones, Notes on the Topography of
Nineveh, p. 405 ff. (in Selections from the Records of the Bom-
bay Government, No. xlii. New Series. Bombay 1857).
Arab., is represented to-day by the village of
Lasim, about three quarters of a mile to the south-west of
Ta'ûk, or Dakôķa öö, ?, apparently a town on the
great road from Bagdad to Môşul, about nine hours south of Kerkûk.
See Assemànî, B. O., iii. 1, p. 155, col. 2; p. 443. col. 2; Hoffmann,
Auszüge, p. 274 and note 643; and Nöldeke, Geschichte der Perser
und Araber, p. 483, note 3. The identification of Lashôm with
Dâkôķa proposed by 'Amr bar-Mattai refers only to the bishoprics.
2
Arab. The archbishopric of Bêth Garmai
was one of the largest and most important in the Nestorian
Church, and its limits are roughly marked on the N. by the
Awroman-Azmir-Kandilân mountains, by the Lower Zab on
<pb n="45"/>
in divers places for many years, sometimes in teaching
and exercising himself and others in the Scriptures, and
sometimes in leading the life of a solitary in quiet
places, he went up to the monastery [of Mount Izlá],
and became a disciple of Rabban Mâr Dadh-isho; and
he lived as an anchorite' in the cell of Mår Jacob,
Bishop of Nisibis.* And this blessed man, our Jacob,
dwelt in that cell for a certain time, according to what
Såhdônâ³ saith concerning him, for seven years. Now
when the holy Mâr Dâdh-Isho had also departed to
the life of blessedness, the holy Mâr Bâbhai* the Great
became the head of that holy monastery. But inasmuch
as our holy father Mâr Jacob chose great humility, and
to be thought of no account at all, according to what
his disciples write concerning him, he made himself a
stranger to all positions of worldly honour, and he made
himself a servant of all that holy brotherhood. And
although before God, the Lord of all, he was a great
and honourable man, yet by reason of his nakedness
and poverty he was despised and held to be of no
account by those void of understanding. And he set
the W., by the Ḥemrin mountains on the S., and the Diyâlâ
and Shirwân rivers on the E. The identification of the towns,
rivers, etc., in this diocese has been excellently worked out by
Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 253ff., 'Umfang der Diocese Beth Garmai!'
For towns in Bêth Garmai, see pp. 267-277.
*
See B. O., iii. I, pp. 301, 435, 554-
3 I. e., Sâhdônȧ, a member of the Mission of Bishops which
I was sent to Heraclius; he became converted to the views held
by the Jacobites by the head of a convent near Apamea. The
history of his apostasy is given by Thomas of Margà Bk. ii.
chap. 6, and the account of his writings in Bk. I. chap. 34.
* Not Bàbhai, the Patriarch, who succeeded Acacius A. D. 499,
and who decreed that his successors should marry. Bar-Hebraeus,
Chron. Eccles., ii. col. So.
<pb n="46"/>aside many conflicts and afflictions [caused] by the
rebellious devils there, to whom he appeared as one
not to be conquered by any means whatever; but they'
made a goad for him as we are shortly about to say.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="26"/>
CHAPTER VII.3
OF THE BLESSED MAR BABHAI.*
Now this blessed man Mâr Bâbhai came from Bêth
'Ainâthâ, a city of Bêth Zabhdai, and according to
Read ops?
3 This chapter has been
B. O., ii. 1, p. 88. col. 1.
2 Read x.
printed with a Latin translation in
+ Bàbhai the Great, third governor of the Monastery of Îzlà,
flourished about A. D. 569-628 under the Nestorian. Patriarchs
Ezekiel, Isho-yahbh of Arzôn, Sabhr-Ìsho' and Gregory. See
B. O., . I, p. 88. col. I. He must be distinguished from
Bâbhai bar-Něşibhnayê, who flourished under the Catholicus
Selîbha-zěkhà (A. D. 713-729), and who was famous for his
beautiful voice. On the death of the Catholicus Gregory of
Kashkar in 607, he together with Mar Abba the archdeacon
(see B. O., iii. I, p. 93. col. 1.), guided the Nestorian Church
through a period of persecution and great difficulty. He was
appointed inspector of monasteries by the Archbishops of Bêth
Garmai, Adiabene and Nisibis, who entrusted to his care the
task of rooting out from them such men as held the doctrine of the
Meşalleyânê. He performed his work with such zeal and success, and
ruled the Nestorian Church so ably during this period that, after
the murder of Chosroës II. in 628, he would certainly have been
elected Catholicus had he not declined to accept the dignity. See
Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 121; Wright, Syriac Literature, p. 842;
Guidi, Un nuovo testo siriaco sulla storia degli ultimi Sassanidi
(Actes du 8° Congrès des Orientalistes tenu en 1889 à Stock-
holm et à Christiania), p. 17, at the foot.
5 to be distinguished from the line of Yakut
(iv, p. 252) which lay upon the left bank of the Tigris in Bêth
kardo. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 173; Yâķût i. 472.
6
باز بدى Arab جي بجنون
For the name see Yakût i. 466.
<pb n="47"/>
what is written concerning him, he also was, like Jacob
our father, a disciple of Mâr Abraham. [And although
he was] a learned and a wise man, he was by nature
somewhat hasty of speech and harsh in command. He
wrote a lucid commentary on the works of the Fathers.*
Now when Már Dadh-isho had departed this life, and
Mår Bâbhai had become the head of the community,
being the third head in the order of succession, Satan
began to sow the accursed tares of the doctrine of
abominable things in that blessed field of choice wheat
sown' by excellent husbandmen.
CHAPTER VIII.
OF THE CORRUPT MEN WHO ROSE UP IN HIS DAYS IN THE
HOLY MONASTERY [OF MOUNT IZLÂ].
Now Satan, the enemy of the race of man, who from the
beginning fought with our parents in Eden;³ who wickedly
Béth Zabhdai was a district on the western or right bank of
the Tigris, adjacent to Gazîret ibn 'Omar.
* According to the statement in the Catalogue of 'Abhd-
Ishô' he wrote eighty-three volumes (B. O., iii. 1. 94), which
included: the Cause of Hosannas; the Book of Union (a work
on the two natures of our Lord); a commentary on the Centuries
of Evagrius; the Book of Abbâ Mark; a history of the followers
of Diodorus; a work on the Festival of the Cross; a book of
hymns, etc., for the commemorations of the Virgin Mary and Saint
John, and other commemorations throughout the year; rules for
novices; canons for monks; a commentary on Holy Scripture;
letters to Joseph Hazzaeus; and a discourse on Matthew the wanderer,
Abraham of Nisibis and Gabriel of al-Katar. To these Dr. Wright
adds a Life of George, a convert, whose name was Mihrâmgushnasp,
and a few hymns. See Assemânî, B. O., Catal. Vat., iii.
pp. 367-372; B. O., iii. 1, p. 94ff.; Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp-91,
173; Bickell, Conspectus, pp. 37. 38.
ܚܩܠܐ refers to ܙܪܝܥܬ
3 Genesis iii. I.
<pb n="48"/>sowed the name of polytheism in the world; who drew
on Cain to his own will; who made the sons of God* to
sin, and brought them down from their membership in
the divine household; who made the licentious Ham
rejoice in the shame of his father ³; who taught those
senseless builders to build a tower in Shinar to fight
against God; who alienated Esau from a right course
of action; who made the sons of the prophet Moses
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="27"/> to cast off the yoke that they might not walk
in the glorious manner of life of their father; who made
the sons of Eli and the sons of Samuel to take bribes
and to sport with the women in the tabernacle; who
made Gehazi a stranger to the calling and manner
of life which the service of the blessed Elijah' required;―
when that enemy saw that that holy assembly, by a course
of life exalted above the body and out of the common
order, was shining with the rays of the light of purity,
he set apart for himself in that flock certain solitaries,
and filled them with the spirit of whoredom, and he
confounded their imaginations with the lust of the flesh,
the mother of lasciviousness. Now if these men had
* Genesis iv. 8.
2 Genesis vi. 2. For the cause of the fall of the sons of
Seth, who are identified with the sons of God, see Bezold,
Die Schatzhöhle, p. 18ff. and Budge, Book of the Bee, p. 27 ff.
For explanations of the term 'sons of God' see
Payne Smith, Thesaurus, col. 199.
אֱלֹהִים-Si.
3 Genesis ix. 22. 4 Genesis xi. 2. 5 Genesis xxv. 34-
6 The allusion may be to some legend of Moses of which
many abound in Oriental literature, or to Judges xviii. 30.
7 I Samuel ii. 22.
8 I Samuel viii. 3.
92 Kings v. 20. Thomas means Elisha.
10 This and the following clause are quoted by Assemânî,
B. O., iii. 1, p. 88. col. 2. For An he reads .
1
<pb n="49"/>
at the first growth of their imaginations resisted the
wiles of Satan, and [had not made themselves] a place
of refuge for the wicked thoughts which he was sowing
in them even for a moment, they could at once have
cast them out of their minds, and he would neither
have been able to do harm to their upright under-
standing, nor to make them the ready vessels of his
will. And it happened to them according to what Abbâ
Pôman (Poèmen)* spake, saying, “The Evil One has
three powers which go before all sin. First of all he
lays down error,³ and after error, negligence, and after
negligence, lust. Now when error hath obtained the
mastery over a solitary brother, it taketh away the
remembrance of divine things from his heart, and
delivereth him over to negligence, that he may not be
aroused and put away from him the slumber of his
remissness; and after negligence cometh the madness
of lascivious desire, by reason of which the whole man
becometh a vessel perfected for destruction.*
What
.ܘܩܣܬܠܐ for ܘܒܣܬ݂ܠܐ ܃
* Saint Poemen retired to Scete about A. D. 390, and he
died there seventy years after. For his life see Butler, Lives of
the Saints, Aug. 27; Rosweyde, Vitae Patrum, p. 497ff. Cotelerius,
Monumenta, t. i. pp. 585-637. For as we should perhaps
read;Пov. A number of the sayings of Poemen are
given by Palladius, and see also Add. 14,606 (Wright, Cat.
Syr. MSS., p. 744, col. 2) fol. 966, and Add. 12,175 (Wright
Cat. Syr. MSS., p. 635, col. 2) fol. 1946.
.ܕܐܝܬܘܗܝ ܛܘܥܝܝ a Reading with Vat
* In the Paradise of Palladius, Sayings of the Fathers, No.
, this passage reads: -
Napo raw
215 №00 125 AA
po
pos só
oso
is AND s.25
20 aspal 24 satos
g
<pb n="50"/>then? Those wretched and contemptible men, by the
evil counsel of the Calumniator, went down secretly,
and took unto themselves women, whom, according
to what history handeth down, they brought to the
outside cells in which they lived; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="28"/> and they
continued in this corrupt and abominable course of
life some short time. But our God, that good and
gracious Being, Who is longsuffering towards sinners,
and desireth the improvement and the saving of their
lives, when He saw that penitence for the wickedness
which they were committing had not entered into
them, and that they being themselves impure and
defiled, were living in a holy place, and among holy men,
and were not ashamed, He exposed them and put
them to shame in this manner.
CHAPTER IX.
OF THE HOLY MAN RABBAN MÂR ELIYA.
Now there lived in that holy monastery the truly
blessed man Mâr Eliyâ, who in earthly descent came
Jason as
242
"Abbâ Pomen says, 'Satan hath three powers which go before
all sin: the first is error, the second is negligence, and the third
is lust. When error entereth in it giveth birth to negligence,
and from negligence ariseth lust, and through lust man falleth.
Now if [a man] be watchful of error, negligence cannot come;
and if he be not negligent lust cannot arise; and if he work
not lust, by the help of Christ he will never fall'." (fol. 2286).
* This and the three following clauses are quoted by Asse-
mânî, B. O., iii. I. 88. col. 2.
ججج or فيجد Read :
3 This and the six following clauses are quoted in B. O., iii. I.
p. 88. col. 2.
* Probably the famous ascetic who built a monastery on the
Tigris by Hesnâ 'Ebhrâyâ. See Guidi, Un nuovo testo Siriaco, p. 18.
<pb n="51"/>
from Hirtha, the great city of the Ṭayyayê' (Arabs).
He was instructed in doctrine in the city of Nisibis,
and he also became a disciple of the ascetic life in the
holy monastery³ [there]. He followed the path of mon-
astic life blamelessly, and being remote and free from
the gratification of the senses of the body, he excelled
in self-denial, and in zeal against the devils and pas-
sions of the body like his namesake [Elijah the Tishbite],
even as the holy man Abbâ Mâķârîs' (Macarius) saith
"Hirthâ of the Arabs" i.c.,
al-Hirah, called
irthá dhé Na'man, or 1 irthá ܚܝܪܬܐ ܕܢܕܥܡܢ or ,ܚܪܬܐ ܕܪܬܡܢ also
dhe Nu'mân, "the [capital] of Na'mân" was the chief town of
the petty kingdom of the Lakhmite Arabs, traces of which
still exist a little to the south-east of the modern town of
Meshed 'Ali, a few miles from Kûfah. See Hoffmann, Auszüge,
note 863, p. 97; Wright, Chronicle of Joshua the Stylite, p. 45;
Caussin de Perceval, Essai sur l'histoire des Arabes, t. ii. p. 1 ff.;
Noeldeke, Geschichte der Perser und Araber, p. 25; Guidi, Un
nuovo testo Siriaco, p. 9, 1. 14.
2
Tayyayê originally meant the Arabs of the tribe of
✓ Tayyi'. Later, however, the word indicated Arabs gener-
ally, and even Arabs who had embraced Christianity.
3 Probably in the Monastery of Rabban Stephen the Great.
* Two hermits named Macarius lived in Egypt in the fourth
century A. D; the one was named 'Macarius the Egyptian' and
the other 'Macarius the Alexandrian.' Macarius the Egyptian
retired to the desert when he was thirty years old, he lived
there sixty years and died there about A. D. 390, aged ninety.
See Sozomen, Hist. Eccles., iv. 23; Socrates, Hist. Eccles., iii.
14; Rufinus, Hist. Eccles., ii. 4; Tillemont, Mémoires, vii. 57.
In 'Abhd-Isho''s Catalogue (B. O., iii. 1, pp. 44, 45). Macarius
is stated to have written "three volumes on the ascetic life,"
NA op is a For his writings see Cave, Hist. Litt.,
for the year 373; Fabricius, Bibl. Graec., viii. 361; Wright,
Catalogue of Syriac MSS., p. 1304. Macarius was present at
<pb n="52"/>to the wise Mar Evagrius," "So long as we make the
devils rage we abide without injury." And although*
this blessed man naturally kept the strength of his
wrath [to fight] against obstacles to a life of excellence,
the death of Antony the Great. Macarius the Younger, or
Alexandrian, retired to the desert about A. D. 335. Before
349 he went to the Monastery of Saint Pachomius, where he
died A. D. 394. Like his namesake Macarius the Egyptian he
visited Antony, and also suffered banishment with his namesake.
See Sozomen, Hist. Eccles., iv. 23; Socrates, Hist. Eccles., iii.
14; Rufinus, Hist. Eccles., ii. 4; Tillemont, Mémoires, vii. pp. 57
and 102. At the end of the notice of the Macarii by Palladius
-
ܒܪܐ ܐܢܐ ܡܢ ܟܠܗܘܢ ܢܩܐ ܕܩܒܝܢ - : the Syriac version has the following
ܚܕܥܘܢ
.(686 .fol) ܕܐܠܗܐ ܐܟܬܒܝܘܗܝ ܒܕܘܟܬܐ ܕܙܕܩܐ܀
Evagrius of Pontus, born at Ibora in Pontus Galatius, was
taken to Constantinople by Gregory Nyssen A. D. 381. Here
he became enamoured of a married lady of high rank, but
owing to a dream he fled from this city to Jerusalem where
he fell ill. He was received by Melania, who exhorted him to
receive the monastic habit, and about 382 he set out for Egypt,
and eventually retired to "the cells" in the Nitrian desert. He
died about 398, aged fifty-two years, having lived at Scete
seventeen years. He was the teacher of Palladius, Rufinus and
Heraclides of Cyprus, and was himself the pupil of the two
Macarii. See Socrates, Hist. Eccles., iv. 23; Sozomen, Hist.
Eccles., vi. 30; and Palladius, Hist. Laus., cap. 86. According to
'Abhd-Isho' Evagrius wrote" three volumes;" see B. O., iii. 1, p. 45;
Wright, Catalogue of Syriac MSS., p. 1274; and Cave, Hist.
Litt., i, p. 275 ff.
.ܟܕ striking out ܗܟܢܐ ܐܦ We should read 2

<pb n="53"/>
he abode without offence and without injury in [his]
love for man, and in the love of the exact image of
the excellence which [cometh from] the God of our
frail nature. Now by the hand of this man, who was
admirable in his manner of life, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="29"/> God, the Lord
of all, exposed the secret crime which had taken place
in that holy congregation in his days. And as God,
the Lord of all, destroyed and slew the prophets of
Baal by the hand of the blessed Mâr Elijah, so it
pleased the Lord of all to root out and destroy those
evil thorns, which were fit and ready for the fiery
furnace, that is, the unclean work' and manner of life
of those men, by the hand of this namesake and fellow-
soldier of Elijah the prophet. Now some say that he
received a revelation from God, and that in an angelic
vision he was commanded to go down from his own
cell in the night season to the cells of those men;
others say that it happened accidentally, and that he
heard the noise of the rods which the women were
using in weaving garments; and others that he found
little boys and girls, the children of those men, playing
round about the cells of their fathers, and that when
he asked them who they were, and whence they came,
they answered him saying, "We belong to this place,
and our fathers are such an one, and such an one;"³
but by whatever way it happened, we must know that
Elijah did not leave his cell without the divine com-
mand, especially at eventide when a solitary should
be diligent in casting choice aromas into the censer of
his heart, to make from them a sweet-smelling savour
11 Kings xviii. 40.
.ܕܦܘܠܚܢܐ Read 2
3 This passage is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 8o. col. 2.
<pb n="54"/>for the whole night,-merely to go down [to walk]
among the cells of the solitaries. Now when he saw
and knew [what had happened], he marvelled with an
exceeding great wonder. And since by nature heat of
temper and exciteable and fiery zeal cleave to the race
of Ishmaelites, he burned with fervour and became hot
with wrath, and like Elijah the prophet he complained
to God, saying, “The children of Israel have forsaken
Thy covenant,' they have trodden Thy law under foot,
they have forgotten Thy commandments, and instead
of the fatherhood of Abraham their father, they have
chosen for their father Satan the enemy of the race
of man."
CHAPTER X. 2
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="30"/> OF THOSE THINGS WHICH THE BLESSED MAN DID
ON THE MORNING OF THAT DAY.
It was a custom in that holy monastery that the
board by which the congregation was summoned should
not be struck, for any cause whatever, without the
command of the head of the convent; and whenever
this was done without the governor's command it was
a sign and an indication that they were removing the
head of the convent from his governorship.
Now when it was morning, the blessed Mâr Elijah
went down to the monastery, and commanded the
sacristan to go up and strike the board to summon
the congregation. And when the sacristan heard [this],
* 1 Kings xix. 10.
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 89. col. 1 ff.
the board which was نواق .plur ناقوس Arab نعمت 3
struck with a hammer to summon the monks together.
<pb n="55"/>
on account of the greatness and honourable position
of him that gave the command, he did not excuse*
himself and say, "I cannot do this without the com-.
mand of Rabban, the head of the convent," but at the
command he did what the blessed man told him;
and all [the monks] were gathered together and came
to the church. Now the holy man Mâr Bâbhai, who
was head of the convent in those days, marvelled³
that contrary to his command, and for some cause
unknown to him,³ the board to summon the congregation
had been struck. And he called the sacristan and
asked him, "By whose command hast thou struck the
board?" and the sacristan answered and said, "Mâr
Elijah the Zealous comanded me;" and Mâr Bábhai
called Mâr Elijah and told him to reveal to him the
cause of this unaccustomed gathering together. Then
Mâr Elijah answered and said, "How is it, ○ our
father and head, that the things which are done afar
off, and at a distance, are revealed to thee, while the
manifest wickedness which is [wrought] near at hand
in thy monastery is hidden from thee? How is it that
those who are not under the subjection of thy headship
tremble and hide themselves at the report of thy being
near or afar off, while in this divine inheritance Sodom
is being raised to life again, und Geba' rebuilt? How
.ܐܫܬܐܠ Read -
ܬܘܗ Read 3
2 Read
B. O., . 1, p. 89. col. I. 1. 16 has oxos spesas No o
Lxara? Zam.
.ܟܕ ܠܝܬ ܥܠܬܐ ܕܠܗ ܝܕܝܬܐ Read 5
6 Read
on.
71 Kings xv. 22; 2 Chronicles xvi. 6; Isaiah x. 29. I am
unable to explain the allusion here.
<pb n="56"/>hath the gangrene and stinking sore' taken root and
spread in the members of the holy body of the sons*
of thy holiness?³ <pb type="textAllignment"  n="31"/> What availeth* the blessing
of our father Abraham, or the bringing up of Mår
Dadh-isho, or the teaching of the Giḥôn³ river of thy
doctrine if thy instruction hath [only] been fruitful in
bringing forth a brood of cursed snakes, which are the
children of the Serpent, the murderer, that is to say
these men of our congregation who are sitting before
thee, for behold their eyes see and their ears hear?
They have conceived iniquity, 6 and brought forth
falsehood,' they have drunk troubled waters,³ they
have eaten husks, they have whored with the daughters
of Moab by the counsel of a spiritual" Balaam, and
they have forgotten the God" of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob. To thee it belongeth, O our father, like
Phinehas the zealous, to drive the spear of thy zeal
into these unclean men, and to rip open those who
have laid a blot on the congregation of the fathers
of all the children of the East. To thee, I say, it
belongeth to drive out and to destroy from Bethel,
ܙܩܫܘܚܢܐ Read 1
.ܕܒܫܝܐ Read -
3 B. O., grapo?.
5
Ar.
* Lit. 'where.'
the Nile. In a passage quoted
by Payne Smith (Thes. col. 708) the teaching of the four
Evangelists is compared to the four rivers of Paradise. The
teaching of St. Matthew is compared to the bursting overflow
and there is a play on the ,ܒܕܡܘܬ ܓܚܚܘܢ ܓܚ ܝܘܠܦܢܗ 6f the Nile
.ܓܝܚܘܢ ܨܓܚ words
7 Psalm vii. 14.
9 St. Luke xv. 16.
12 Peter ii. 15.
13 Numbers xxv. 7, 8.
6 Cf. Proverbs xxii. 8.
8 Jeremiah 2. 13.
10 Numbers xxv. I.
12 Deut xxxii. 18.
<pb n="57"/>
the house of the Lord God of thy fathers, those men
who appeared to me in a vision." Now when these
and other such like words had been spoken by the
holy mouth, and trembling and terror had fallen upon
every man, the holy Mar Båbhai said to him, "Thou
must indeed shew me the proof of these thy words,
and that which is proper, and that which is incumbent
upon me to do, I will do." And Elijah making a sign
with his hand, pointed out and discovered those wretch-
ed men, and said, "These are they who have erred
and gone forth from the fold of life to feed among
the thorns; these are they who have forsaken Jerusalem,
and wished to walk among the serpents of the waste
places of Jericho;' these are they who have made a
calf in Horeb, and worshipped a molten image, and
have changed their object of honour into filth and
unclean stinkingness! Behold there are women in their
cells, and children with them! These are they whose
wickedness hath driven me to give a command and to
do a deed³ without the command of thy holiness."
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="32"/>
CHAPTER XI.+
OF THOSE THINGS WHICH MAR BABHAI AND ALL THE
FATHERS DID.
Now when these things had been thus zealously
said and made manifest by the hand of this second
Joshua vi. 26. Conf. Suidas s. v. Thaε015 ŎpeσIV, a
species of serpent found especially near Jericho.
Exodus xxxii. 4.
Lit. "I have commanded a command, and I have done a deed."
* The first five lines of this chapter are quoted in B. O., iii. 1,
p. 89. col. 2.
h
<pb n="58"/>Elijah, the hearts of those holy men were cast down; and
they removed from [the offenders] the garb of the ascetic
life, and cut off the tonsure of their heads, and drove
them forth and expelled them from thence, together with
their wives and their children, and they kindled a flame
and burned their cells with fire. Thus they rooted out
that evil from among them, even as the children of
Israel, when they were zealous with the zeal of the will
of the Lord, destroyed the children of Benjamin' with the
mouth of the sword, because they had corrupted the
Iways and paths of purity, and had renewed among
themselves the customs of the Sodomites; and as Ishmael
and the children of Ķențôrâ (Keturah), were driven
forth from the house of Abraham," and made aliens,
that they might not inherit the paternal inheritance
together with the son of the free woman; and as
Manasseh also was rejected. who corrupted the holy
generations of the Lord,³ and established in the holy
temple an idol with four faces,* [so also were they
driven forth and rejected]. Now although these
men went forth in the disgrace of which their actions
were worthy, yet, they finally offered penitence, and
remembered Christ their Lord, and they did not bring
their lives to an end with acts of wickedness. Now,
by the hand of God, we will speak concerning these
men in the place which requireth it.
• Judges xx. 35.
* Genesis xxi. 14; Genesis xxv. 1—6.
32 Kings xxi. 7. 2 Chron. xxxiii. 7.
* I am unable to explain the allusion here.
<pb n="59"/>
CHAPTER XII.
OF THE UNLAWFUL ACCUSATION WITH WHICH OUR HOLY
MAR JACOB OF BETH 'ABHE WAS ACCUSED, AND OF THE
JUDGMENT, REMOTE FROM JUSTICE, WITH WHICH HE WAS
JUDGED.
Now when those guilty men had been cast forth
into exile, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="33"/> and had been justly driven away to
a great distance, and Satan saw that his labour had been
made of none effect, and that his disciples had been
condemned, he wished also to cast out and to drive away'
from that [monastery] those chosen and excellent men
who would not enter into his snares, and who could
not be caught in his nets. And he stirred up an accu-
sation against the holy Rabban Mâr Jacob, as being
one whose cell was near to the habitations of those
men, and as one who had known of their whole course
of life, and who had, during the whole time past,
sheltered instead of discovering them. And the holy
Már Elijah according to his customary vehemence made
an attack upon him³ saying, "All this folly is thine, and
thou art guilty of all this sin; for if thou hadst revealed
the matter and shown it to me at the beginning, these
men would either have been admonished or expelled."*
And by this tumult which had risen up against him,
this most meek and humble of all men, who knew not
that any sin besides his own existed in creation, whose
eye was pure, and who never perceived wickedness in
Read, with C, usio.
2 Hoffmann would read, with C,
pl.
3 Eshtafal of - se conjecit in, conflixit cum; σuvodeÚeiv
astronomice. Hoffmann.
* We should rather expect this to be the speech of Mår Bȧbhai.
<pb n="60"/>his neighbour, who never injured a man all the days
of his life, who never chid and who was never angry,
without making any answer whatever to those who
blamed him, with his looks bent to the ground, and
with his eyes full of tears, and with sorrowful penitence
in his heart, was he driven forth, and he went out from
that monastery by the order and decree of the word
of Mâr Bâbhai. And he departed with a venerable and
holy disciple called Bar-Nôn who had been his companion
for a long time past, and thus they two went forth to
the mountains of Kardo' to lead the life of anchorites.
CHAPTER XIII.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="34"/> OF THE THINGS WHICH HAPPENED IN THAT HOLY
MONASTERY AFTER THE GOING FORTH OF MAR JACOB.
It is evident that meekness and humility are the
most excellent of all the virtues which are cultivated
and perfected by the body and the soul, and we may
learn this from many things; and that there is nothing
worse than pride and arrogance we may also learn
from hearing and reading and seeing. If then, ac-
cording to the command of the Lord Jesus Christ,
thou art meek and gracious, and art of no ac-
count in thine own eyes and thy heart is filled with
penitence and self-condemnation, then thou shalt find
that all men [are thy] friends, and thou shalt turn the
harshness of foes to kindness, and our Lord God shall
make thee beloved in the sight of all men. And thou
I. e., Gebel al-Gûdî of the Arabs, on the left bank of the
Tigris, over against Gezîret ibn 'Omar.
<pb n="61"/>
shalt also live uninjured with destructive beasts and
harmful reptiles, like this holy father,' who when he
was unjustly condemned, and unlawfully accused, neither
judged, nor thought himself to be like unto one of those
men who condemned him, but commended the whole
matter to God, to Whom belongeth the earth, and
Who judgeth the round world with righteousness.
Now therefore, when the blessed Jacob had thus
gone forth therefrom and the honourable head' of the
monastery had laid a ban of many lines, [full] of denun-
ciations and accusations upon him, (let him that desireth
to know what manner of ban it was read the epistle
which the holy Mår Isho-yahbh,³ Bishop of Báladh,*
.ܕܠܐܒܘܢ Read -
2 Read.
Ish-yahbh II. was the fourth head of the Monastery of
Izla. He was born at Gedhâlâ, or Gudal J, near Môşul.
He studied at Nisibis, was made Bishop of Bâlâdh, and was,
on the death of Gregory, elected Patriarch (628-644). He was
sent in 630 by Bôràn, the daughter of Khosrau II., on an
embassy to Heraclius, and Bar-Hebræus says that when quest-
ioned by the Greeks as to his faith he confessed himself to
be of the same faith as they, whereby the faithful in his diocese
were much scandalized; when he returned he made an apology
in which he said that he had not agreed on this matter with
the Greeks. The Emperor made him take a wife like the other
Patriarchs. According to 'Abhd-1sho his works consisted of a
Commentary on the Psalms, sundry letters and stories, and a
discourse on various matters 25000 2031 20 propp rawal
p. He died about A. D. 647. See Bar-Hebræus,
Chron. Eccles., ii. col. 114f.; B. O., ii. 416-418; iii. 1, p. 105;
Baethgen, Fragmente, pp. 13. 19. 108. iii; Wright, Syr. Lit.,
p. 842. col. 2. For the account of his embassy to Heraclius
by Thomas of Marga see Book ii. cap. 4.
* Baladh, or Eski-Môşul, is situated on the east bank of the
Tigris about forty miles above Môșul. See B. O., ii, p. lxix;
<pb n="62"/>who afterwards became Catholicus, wrote to Mâr Jacob,
from which he will learn the exact contents. I do not
set it down here out of respect for Mâr Bâbhai, nor is
it right to make an accusation against holy men who
in common with other people, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="35"/> suffer from short-
comings or defects, especially' when the divine Will,
which maketh upright men to act according as it
pleaseth is hidden from our understanding) the holy
fathers who lived there at that time saw what had
been done, and that that praiseworthy man had
without fault been driven forth unjustly, and they all put
on indignation, and rebuked and chid the head of the
monastery and strove with him, saying, "Thou ad-
ministerest the things of God unjustly and after the
manner of men, and according to a natural disposition
which cannot be praised. Thou hast condemned the
blessed and meek Jacob without our knowledge, and
thou hast driven him away without our [consent]. Send
then after him, wherever he is, and know that if thou
dost not do so we all shall leave the convent. It is
our opinion that he has performed the work of God in
a twofold manner, and that he has acted rightly in
sheltering the sinners, and leaving them to the Divine
examination, even though, according to what thou hast
decreed concerning him, he had seen the wickedness.
He was not constituted a ruler and a corrector for
thee, but for himself alone was he judge, and it was
Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 97, 211; and the authorities quoted by
Payne Smith (Thesaurus, col. 530).
* All the MSS. have , but we ought perhaps to read
ܬܝܝܰܐܝܬ
The MSS. have, but read
<pb n="63"/>
sufficient for him, and he purified his heart from seeing
the wickedness of others. In which of the Scriptures
canst thou shew us that we are commanded to neglect
the care of our own souls, to judge the sins of others,
after the manner of outside judges' who pursue gnats
with care, and swallow camels?" On the contrary we
are commanded to pray for our enemies, and to love
him that hateth us, and that to him who would strive
with us and who would take away from us our tunic,
we should also give our cloak.³ Moreover also, it was
thy bounden duty to correct those sinful men merci-
fully, and the women with whom they were united
Iwould have gone forth, and the men would have been
sanctified by fasting and prayer, according to what we
learn in the Holy Scriptures was done in various places
to sinners and transgressors, even as the man in the
[Epistle to the] Corinthians who lived with his father's
wife, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="36"/> was corrected and afterwards accepted;
and as is written in the elders, what Abba Pôman
(Poemen) did to him to whom his wife gave birth, how
he afflicted his heart and returned to his former manner
of life; and as in the case of that elder by whose hands
God turned back the young Alexandrian who went to
him, saying, "He desireth not the death of a sinner,
but rather that he may turn from his wickedness and
live." Now when Mâr Bâbhai saw that the holy fathers
1. e.; judges of this world.
3 St. Matthew v. 40.
2 St. Matthew xxiii. 24.
4 1 Corinthians v. i.
5 7. e., in the Sayings of the Fathers.
6 Ezekiel xviii. 27. "A certain old man was asked by a toiler
in the ascetic life, 'Doth God accept the repentance of the sinner'?
After the old man had taught him by many things he said to
him, 'Tell me, my beloved, wouldst thou cast away thy garment
<pb n="64"/>of his congregation strove with him, and that he was
unable to make an apology for this act, especially as
he knew not whither the blessed Mar Jacob had gone,
he fell into great doubt.
because it was torn?' The toiler replied, 'No, I would sew it
up and use it again.' The old man said, 'If thou hast pity
upon thy garment which is without feeling, shall not God have
compassion upon the work which He hath fashioned"?"
"A certain brother asked Father Sisoes, saying, 'What shall
I do, father, for I have fallen?" The old man said to him, 'Rise
up again. The brother saith, 'I did rise up, and again I fell."
The old man said to him, 'Rise up again'. The brother said
to him, 'I did rise up again many times, and I fell'. The old
man said to him, 'Rise up again.' The brother said to him,
'Until when?' The old man said to him, 'Until thou advancest
either to good deeds or to ruin, for in that thing in which a
man advanceth he will go on, whether it be to death, or
whether it be to life'."
"Abbà Poemen said, 'I prefer the man who hath sinned and
done wickedly and become good again to the man who hath
never sinned and hath never shown repentance; for the former
hath a humble opinion [of himself], but the latter considereth
himself to be a righteous man."
ܥܕܡܐ ܕܬܬܩܕܡ ܐܘܒܣܘܥܪ̈ܢܐ ܫܦܝܪ̈ܐ. ܐܘ ܒܡܦܘܠܬܐ. ܒܐܝܕܐ ܓܝܪ ܕܡܬܩܕܡ ܒܪܢܡܐ ܒܗ
<pb n="65"/>
CHAPTER XIV.
OF THE DISPERSION OF THE HOLY FATHERS INTO ALL
COUNTRIES, WHICH ALTHOUGH IT WAS CONSIDERED TO HAVE
BEEN WROUGHT BY EVIL TEMPER AND HUMAN PASSION,
WAS NEVERTHELESS THE DIVINE WILL AND WORK.
Now therefore, as the loadstone' collecteth particles
of iron, and attracteth them, and bindeth them to itself,
and imparteth to them some of its own force, so also
were those holy fathers, who were gathered together
and formed a part of that holy congregation, [drawn]
like particles of iron to the afore-mentioned stone, into
that matter of contention, which beginning with small
matters ended with great results, and they went forth
from that monastery because the bond of agreement
between them was broken. Now Mar Bar-Idtâ, an
ascetic, who possessed the powers of a seer,* with the
eye of the spirit foresaw this dispersion, and one day
he cried out to the old men of his congregation, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="37"/>
and said to them, "My brethren, many matters come
to pass and are wrought in this world, which from the
trials [to which they give rise] ³, or from their outward
appearance, are thought by men either to arise from
the opposition of devils, or to have been performed
Sodo pro bono - Up No
On the "acceptance of Repentance"
from the Questions in the Paradise of Palladius, Nos.
ܚܫܬ ܠܗ ܢܦܫ ܒܝܟܫܒܘܗܝ ܙܕܝܩܐ ܀
ܬܩܨܘ
and ܬܩܦܚ
.ܟܐܦܐ ܕܢܬܦ ܠܦܪܙܠܐ ܠܘܬܗ ,i. e., isos Mcvnns ,ܡܓܢܛܝܣ
, i. c., TVWOTIKÓS.
This word is probably corrupt. Hoffmann sug-
2
3
.as the correct reading ܒܚܙܘܢܗܘܢ or ܒܚܘܪܗܘܢ gests
i
<pb n="66"/>by the natural imagination of man; but our Lord' God
bringeth forth the dispensation of His Will from them,
according as He knoweth what is best, and at the end
the wise and prudent know that they were not per-
formed without His command, and that it was in no
common manner that they came to the end which stirred
up the praise of the wise, as for example, the flight of
Jacob from Esau, the selling³ of Joseph, the murder
of the Egyptian by Moses,' the persecution of David
by the hands of Saul, and many other such like matters."
Thus also must it have been in this case, in respect
of the assembly of our holy father Mâr Abraham,―now
the meek and lowly Mâr Dâdh-isho had departed this
temporary life-in the matter of the contention which
was about to arise, by which many of the holy fathers of
that monastery were scattered abroad in every place. "And
after a few years," as the historian saith, "that is to say,
when this trouble came upon them, the holy Rabban Mâr
Elijah, and Mâr Ḥěnân-isho, his sister's son, came to Ni-
neveh, to the blessed Abbâ John the Elder, who had
been sent thither by Rabban Mâr Abraham, and the
three of them built that holy monastery. And thus
Abbâ Benjamin, and Peter, and Paul, and John, and
Adâdâ, and Ishai (Jesse), came to the Monastery of
Bêth 'Abhê. And another Abbâ Jacob went to Abba
Hebhisha; Abbâ John to Neḥêl; and Ûkhâmâ (i. e., the
Read
* Genesis xxvii, xxviii.
a rare word of which one example only is given ,ܡܙܕܒܢܢܘܬܐ 3
by Payne Smith.
5 Exodus ii. 12.
7 For quotations from this
col. I, and p. 469 col. 2.
* Genesis xxxvii. 28.
6 I Samuel xix.
chapter see B. O., iii. 1, pp. 255.
<pb n="67"/>
Black'), and Sabakht' to Beth-Zabhdai; and Abba Sah-
rowai to Arzôn,³ where he built a monastery; Rabban
Sabhr-Isho to the Monastery of 'Abba Shappirà; Abba
John of Adharmah³ to Dåsen; and Abbá Zékhá-Îsho'
and Rabban Abraham to Dåsen, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="38"/>. And they,
Read . ., . The name Se-bôcht means
"three have saved". See Nöldeke, Geschichte der Perser,
p. 396, note 1.
2 A district on the western or right bank of the Tigris,
adjacent to Geziret ibn 'Omar. It is the Bezabde of Ammianus
(lib. xx. 7).
³ I. c., 'Apažiavηvý, a town and province of Armenia on the
borders of Mesopotamia, north of Hisn Kêfâ. See Hoffmann,
Auszüge, p. 174, note 1359. The province extended from
Geziret ibn 'Omar on the east to Diarbekir on the west. The
town is represented by the modern for Erzerum.
See B. O, ii. 1, pp. 255. 469.
-
The name of a bishopric and a place
situated between Nisibis and Mosul. See Hoffmann, Ausaige,
p. 203; and Yakut, 1. p. 177.
6 Dåsen was the mountainous tract of country called by
the Arabs Gebel Dásin, (identified with the Gåra mountains),
which rising near Da'údiya in the west extends along to the
Upper Zäb and away to the east into Gebel Pir Hasan Beg.
Dåsen must have been bounded on the north by 'Amêdiya and
the valley of the Sapna, and its most southern district was
Batnura, or Bé-tannûrê, which lay along the Bedu rivulet, (a
small tributary which flows into the Upper Zab), about six or
seven hours from 'Amêdiya. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 202
-207, and the authorities quoted by him. For Be-tannûrê and
the Bedu rivulet see Badger, The Nestorians, vol. 1, pp. 210
and 380. For Aadev of the LXX see Lagarde, Materialen,
1867, . 90. The modern diocese of Már Auraham of Gunduk
which comprises a number of villages south of the Gara
mountains and those round about Akra, represents the diocese
of Dåsen and a part of the diocese of Marga.
7 Or
<pb n="68"/>and many others, built holy monasteries in various places,
and thus by the Divine Power which aided them, the
departure and the dispersion' which outwardly carried
suffering and strife into their hearts, at the last became
a peace-making and friendly gathering together. And
they filled the country of the East with monasteries,
and convents, and habitations of monks, and Satan who
had rejoiced at their discomfiture was put to shame;
and they raised up to God everywhere holy worshippers
of His commandments. May we be sustained by our
Lord through their prayers, and according to His Will
may we live before him in grace, Amen.
CHAPTER XV.
OF RABBAN BAR-HADH-BHE-SHABBÂ, [AND OF THE MONASTERY
WHICH HE BUILT].
Now this old man' Rabban Bar-Hadh-bhe-Shabba
came from the village of Ḥadhôdh,* and according to what
is written in the history of him, he also was a disciple
in the Great Monastery; and he also came down there-
from in this dispersion and was one of that holy body
of monks who came to Bêth 'Abhê. And he dwelt in
the valley which was above his village Ḥadhodh, and
built there a large monastery and lived in it. And there
were gathered unto him a few brethren, and he re-
mained with them and excelled in the deeds of a life
of virtue all his days; and he gave large gifts to his
4
Reading, with Hoffmann, 15½ Max.
Read
3 6, a title of honour.
or see text p. 214. 6; 238. 11.
<pb n="69"/>
monastery and bequeathed to it all his inheritance of
the house of his fathers. And when Rabban Jacob came
to him on his way to Beth ‘Âbhê, he also came with
him to this holy monastery, and tarried' with him until
Mâr Jacob was established in the governorship there-
of; then he returned to his own monastery and dwelt
in it all the days of his life. His convent continued
for a great many years, and flourished and increased
through the healings and mighty deeds which were
wrought at the place where his bones were laid <pb type="textAllignment"  n="39"/>.
Before our time, however, it was entirely ruined and
deserted, and his holy body was removed and laid in
the martyrium of this monastery' together with those
of the holy fathers; may our assembly be preserved
from harm by their prayers, Amen.
CHAPTER XVI.
OF THOSE MEN WHO WERE DRIVEN FORTH FROM THE GREAT
MONASTERY, AND OF WHITHER THEY WENT AND DWELT,
AND OF HOW THEY PLEASED GOD.
Neither iniquity, nor sin, nor any kind of folly or
shortcoming, hath power or place before the great
might of repentance. It was this power which turned
back the prodigal son to his father's house and enriched
him with the paternal inheritance;³ it sanctified Mary
the sinner; it absolved the thief upon the Cross;³ it
exalted the publican' in the temple above him that
Read
.
3 St. Luke xv. 20.
5 St. Luke xxiii. 42.
I. e, in Bêth Abhê.
4 St. Luke vii. 48.
6 Late for imants.
<pb n="70"/>fasted; it delivered the inhabitants of Nineveh from
destruction; and it also had mercy³ upon those sinful
monks, and raised up their feebleness to the sonship
of a good name.
Now when they had gone forth from that monastery.
they sent away the women to whom the devils had
united them, and they went to . . . .
to a
quiet place where they dwelt for a long time. And
with tears, and penitence, and spiritual suffering, and
the burning pains of conscience, and the contrition of
the understanding of their hearts, they purified them-
selves from the filthy pollution with which they had
been defiled. And from being lost, they were found;
from being cast down, they stood upright; and from
being lame, they walked firmly; from being aliens, they
became members of the household [of God]; and from
being outcasts and abominations, they became saints
and crowned ones; for they had put away from them
all the riotous living with which they were contam-
inated <pb type="textAllignment"  n="40"/>. And their minds shone; and the
broken faculties of their understandings were brought
to life again; and they remained like a new man in
all the united power which is established by the body
and the soul, that is to say by practice and spiritual con-
templation, the two powers by which, when united we
please God, the Lord of all, and honour our neighbour.
Jonah iii. 5-10.
St. Luke xviii. 14.
يفه for شبي 3
* The MSS. have, but Assemànî has (B. O., iii. 1,
pp. 90,470) Phugitha, and says that it is 'locus apud
Izlense coenobium'.
col. 2.
,384 .Orient. 2441. fol ܬܐܘܪܝܐ ܗ. ܞܘܢܢܬܐ ܘܪܥܝܢܐ ܝܕܥܬܐ ܕܟܝܢܐ ܘܕܠܐ ܒܣܝܢܐ
<pb n="71"/>
CHAPTER XVII.
OF THE COMING TO THESE MEN OF THE HOLY ABBA JONAH
THE ASCETIC FROM THE GREAT MONASTERY.
Now just as when God, the Lord of all, wished to
forgive the sins of king David, He sent Nathan the
prophet to him,' and by means of the allegory which
he composed, made him perceive his sin, and David
confessed that he was guilty of death, and said, 'I have
sinned', and the answer was returned to him, 'Also the
Lord hath put away thy folly, thou shalt not die'; and
as when He sent Jonah' the prophet, the herald of life,
to Nineveh, and he preached to them, and by his hands
the inhabitants thereof were turned back to what was
seemly; so also did He send to those brethren who
had sinned, and they were made a mockery, even as
they deserved, and they were made outcasts from the
household and inheritance of their fathers. But when
they repented and turned to God with all their hearts,
- just as did the children³ of Israel when they sent
away the remnant of the children of Benjamin' which
had escaped from the sword of their brethren to the
rock of Rimmon, and gave them the right hand, and took
oaths to them in the name of the Lord that they might
return to their villages, and to their inheritance, and
that they might take unto themselves wives from Israel,
and might live and not die-inasmuch as <pb type="textAllignment"  n="41"/>
His whole graciousness and mercy overfloweth the
measure of our sins, and the sea of His loving-kindness
bursts forth to help and redeem us on the smallest
2 Samuel xii.
Read
2
Jonah i. 2.
Judges xxi. 13.
<pb n="72"/>pretence of repentance which we show forth,—so by the
Divine revelation of His all-powerful Will, He made the
blessed man, the holy Rabban Jonah, come to them
from that monastery, and he forgave them their sin
and sanctified them, and he armed them with the spiri-
tual armour of the keeping of the commandments, and
so by a course of life which was pleasing to the Will
of God, they were all made perfect, and they departed
from this world with a fair name which bore praise to
the justifier of their lives, and the expiator of their
offences, Christ our Lord, to Whom be glory for ever
and ever!
CHAPTER XVIII.'
OF SOLOMON BAR-GARAPH THE SOLITARY, FROM THE
MONASTERY OF BAR ȚÛRÂ,³ AND OF THE HISTORIES WHICH
HE WROTE.
There was a solitary brother whose name was So-
lomon bar-Gârâph, from the Monastery of Bar-Ṭurâ, and
the period in which he lived is found to have been in
the days of the holy Mâr Ḥěnân-Isho' the Catholicus.*
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 459, col. 1 f.
See B. O., iii. 1, p. 186. His history of Jacob of Bêth
'Abhê is praised by Thomas of Margâ. See chap. 24.
3 The Monastery of Bar Ţurâ must have been near Bêth
'Abhê. Both these monasteries were freed from the jurisdiction
of the bishop by Isho'-yahbh of Gedhâlâ. See Mai, Script.
Vet. Nova. Coll., t. x, p. 296.
* Ḥenân-Îsho' I, called the Elder or the Lame, was appointed
catholicus A. D. 686, and practically ruled the Nestorian Church
until 701; he was buried in the convent of Jonah near Môşul
See B. O., ii, p. 42; Bar-Hebraeus, Chron. Eccles., ii, col. 135;
Baethgen, Fragmente, pp. 32,117; and Wright, Syr. Lit., p. 843.
<pb n="73"/>
Now this man, from careful investigations and from the
reports of trustworthy men who lived in his days, and
from the traditions' of those who lived before his time,
compiled histories,' graceful of speech and elegant³ of
diction, concerning the anchorites and recluses who lived
before his time in various places, and in these he also
speaks concerning our Mâr Jacob of Beth 'Abhê. And
it is from this history, [in] which he speaketh con-
cerning him, that we know from those who knew [him],
that after he went forth from the Great Monastery, he
departed to the Mountains of Ķardo; and we are certain
concerning [the time of] his expulsion and his return
thither afterwards. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="42"/> But before I set down in writing
that history of our Rabban [Jacob]. I will write in this
book another history which Solomon bar-Gârâph com-
posed concerning the blessed Mår-yahbh and a virgin,
from which is made known how he returned to his cell
in the Great Monastery.
CHAPTER XIX.4
OF THE BLESSED MÂR-YAHBH' AND OF THE VIRGIN NUN
AND RECLUSE.
One of the holy men narrated what he had heard from
the blessed Mår-yahbh, that glorious and wonderful man
Read
2
31.
.ܒܣܩܝܠܘܬ Read ܖ
4 The greater part of this chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1,
p. 106, col. If.
5 Mâr-yahbh was a contemporary of Jacob of Bêth 'Abhê,
and besides the history of Jacob, to which Thomas refers in
this chapter, wrote an Epistle. See B. O., iii. 1, pp. 186,187.
k
<pb n="74"/>among righteous men, the memorial of whom Rabban
Mâr Aphni-Mâran' composed in elegant language, and
he said that the blessed Mâr-yahbh repeated [the follow-
ing]: "When I went up into the mountain that I might
find God, Who is everywhere, and is not limited to
[any one] place, I found there a holy woman, whose
garment, such as it was, was made of dried grass, and
her food consisted of the roots and wild fruits of the
wilderness. And it happened that I found a female
child with her to whom she gave suck. Now [the
cause of the fall of our vile race was also with her
who, after having led the life of [holy and pious] men,
I should more truthfully say of holy angels, for forty
years, fell through the working of Satan. Why should
I keep silence [concerning this]? Now the girl whom
the Guardian of all mankind raised up from her was,
like Mary, in the stead of Eve, heaven instead of earth,
and a life-bearer instead of a death-bearer. And it
I came to pass not long after this that the holy woman,
her mother, died having led a life of good deeds which
were pleasing to God, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="43"/> and she left the divine woman,
her daughter, in her place." Now this holy man Mâr-
yahbh was, at rare times, accustomed to visit this blessed
woman, as he did her mother, and when he felt the
help which came from her, he used to say that, “Al-
though she was in the world, she was not of the world.
And I know not at all if she ever lifted her eyes and
I
Aphni-Maran, the monk, was a disciple of
Kâm-Isho' the fourth Abbot of Bêth 'Âbhê. He flourished
about A. D. 630 while Ishô'-yahbh of Gedhàlà was patriarch.
According to 'Abhd-Ishô' he wrote a commentary on the Epistle
ܡܪܝܗܒ ܐܝܬ ܠܗ ܐܓܪܬܐ ܘܠܐܦܢܝܡܪܢ ܦܘܫܩܞ. which Mar-yahbh composed
See B. O., ii, p. 422. col.; iii. 1, p. 187.
<pb n="75"/>
looked in my face, for her mind was led captive by
the vision of God. Now when I asked her, 'Art thou
content that I should visit thee as I used to visit thy
mother?' she answered me softly in this one word, 'As
it pleaseth thee'." Now this history teaches us that we
should not rely upon ourselves, even though we be
occupied with labours, but that we should take heed to
men, and be silent, according to the word of the Fathers.
CHAPTER XX.
[OF MAR JACOB OF BETH 'ABHE].
Now they say concerning Rabban Jacob, him of
Beth 'Abhê, that when he went forth to that mountain
[Kardo], it was the season of autumn. And a certain
holy man dwelt near the hut of this blessed man with-
out knowing who he was, for he lived in the rock
above him, and he watched the manner of his life.
And it came to pass one day that when the blessed
Jacob went forth from his hut, the holy man went
down and placed some of the herbs upon which
he lived in the hut. And when [the blessed Jacob]
went in and found them, he thought that they had
been placed there for him by an angel of God, and
he began to bow his head and his body down to the
ground, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="44"/> and to return praise to God. Now
when he took the Book of the Gospels [in his hands]
and began to read, Satan, in the form of a serpent,
straightway flew out between him and the Book, and
because of his fear the Book of the Gospels fell out
of his hands. And immediately he heard a voice which
<pb n="76"/>said, «Oh!». Now the voice was that of the holy man
who lived in the rock above him, for he was looking"
on when the blessed Jacob was overcome by the Enemy.
And he straightway rose up and went down to
him, and said to him, "Art thou thus so speedily thrown
down in the fight?" And he continued, saying, “Go
thou from mountain to mountain, until a woman meeteth
thee; whatsoever she shall say to thee, that do,
doubting nothing." Now when he found her, the girl³
was in a pear tree,³ and immediately she saw him, she
came down and fled away. And the elder woman cried
out to him at the top of her voice, saying, "If now
because of this snake which thou hast seen thou art alto-
gether terrified, how canst thou bear the severe onsets of
devils? Rise up, and go back to thy cell, for by thy
hands God is about to make a monastery, which shall
be great and famous throughout all the East; and take
thou this my Book of the Gospels, which is somewhat
defaced, and give me thine." Now inasmuch as that
excellent man had no doubt whatever, the word of the
woman was fulfilled [to him] in unutterable wonder;
may we obtain mercy in the Day of Judgment by the
prayers of him, and of her, and of all God-fearing
people! Amen.
Read
2 I. e., the woman and her daughter referred to in the
preceding chapter.
3 Here the text is probably corrupt. Hoffmann suggests
that we should read on a rock'.
4
Compare Guidi, Un nuovo testo Siriaco, p. 17, at the foot.
ܒܟܠܗ Read ؛
<pb n="77"/>
CHAPTER XXI.
OF THE RETURN' OF MÂR JACOB TO THE MONASTERY OF
MOUNT ÎZLÂ.
Now when the blessed Mår Jacob had heard these
things from the Lord by the hand of that holy woman,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="45"/> although he would rather that his life had been
passed like that of a hermit, far away from human
habitation, and that his dwelling and place of sojourning
had been with the animals, that his mind by the rest
and quietness of the desert might have been united to
God, and that he might have been remote from all
human feelings and affairs, yet when he learnt from that
holy woman that it was the Will of God that he should
return to dwel with men, and that he should become a
father and a bringer up of ascetics and holy men, and
should cause to increase hosts of holy men, who were
to become the children and inheritors of light, he con-
formed to the Will of God which governeth² all things,
and together with his meek and lowly disciple, he re-
turned to that holy monastery [of Mount Izlâ]. And
[when] he had lived in his cell a little while, the
heavenly power urged him, and he was by it selected³
to depart without delay; and it moved Mår Bâbhai,
and by means of it Mâr Jacob went forth therefrom
and came to Bêth 'Âbhê; but as to how [he left] we
are silent, because we do not wish to appear to bring [the
charge of strife against holy men by the hands of fools.
Now when he went forth nine brethren departed
Lit. "Of his coming."
.ܘܐܬܢܪܫ ܕܕܠܐ Read 3
.ܕܡܕܒܪ Read 2
4 Literally "But how, we give to silence."
5 After ½ Hoffmann would add two points:
<pb n="78"/>from that monastery with him, and they clave to him
and wished to dwell with him. And when he came to
Rabban Bâr-Hadh-bhe-shabbâ,' according to what is
written in his history, he received him lovingly, and
rejoiced in him greatly, and went with him to Bêth
'Abhê. And he prophesied to him concerning the
growth of his monastery, and of the greatness of the
honour which Christ our Lord would allot to his con-
gregation, and he tarried with him a short time; and
the blessed Bar-Hadh-be-shabbâ returned to his cell
and his monastery.
CHAPTER XXII.
OF THE JOY AND HAPPINESS, AND THE FESTIVAL FULL OF
GLADNESS WHICH THE MONKS MADE BEFORE HIM WHEN
THEY CAME TO THIS PLACE.
Now as there is joy and gladness to the children,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="46"/> whose father having departed from them and
gone to trade in a far country, and having tarried there a
long while, afterwards returneth to his house in great
prosperity because his business hath doubled many times,
and appeareth among his children in perfect health and
safety, with his face full of joy at the sight of them,
as he findeth them occupying themselves in those matters
which will give him pleasure, so also Abba Benjamin
and his companions had joy and gladness in the coming
of the holy Rabban Jacob to them. And they kissed
his holy person, and he kissed them, even like Jacob
I. e., Bar-hadh-bhe-Shabbâ who lived in Mount Sha'rân
, and whom Sabhr-Ìsho' nominated as his successor.
See B. O., iii. 1, p. 450, col. 2, at the foot, and p. 470, col. 1.
<pb n="79"/>
when Joseph his son appeared,' and they wept on each
other's necks, with a weeping which was begotten of
gladness of spirit. And he dwelt with them all his
days, in all the humility which our Lord taught the
children of His house, saying, "Learn of Me; for I am
meek and lowly in My heart: and ye shall find rest
unto your souls.",
CHAPTER XXIII.3
OF THE TIME WHEN RABBAN JACOB CAME TO THIS COUNTRY,
AND OF KING KHUSRAU³ (CHOSROES) [THE SON OF
HÖRMÎZD]
Now King Khusrau' (Chosroes) the son of Hôrmizd
reigned in the nine hundred and first year, according
to the reckoning of the Greeks, and he lived in
his kingdom thirty-eight years. In the fifth year,³
then, of Khusrau according to what is written by
the holy Rabban Ishő-zěkhá, who lived in the days
of the last Mâr Isho-yahbh,, who built the new
Genesis xlvi. 29.
2 St. Matthew xi. 29.
This chapter is quoted by Assemânî, B. O., iii. 1, pp. 458,471.
4 I. c., to Margâ.
5 more, Pers.
Arab. 5s Xoopóns.
6 Khusrau II. Parwêz reigned from the summer of A. D. 590
to February 25,(29) 628. See Nöldeke, Geschichte der Perser,
table facing p. 434; Guidi, Un nuovo testo Siriaco, p. 24, l. 10.
7 Pers.
Chald. No. Hôrmîzd IV reigned from
February 579-590. See Nöldeke, op. cit., p. 434; Guidi, Un
nuovo testo Siriaco, p. 7, 1. 5. 8 I. e., about A. D. 595.
91. e., Isho'-yahbh, the son of Basṭôhmagh, of Kuphlânâ
in Adiabene. He was one of those who accompanied Îsho-
yahbh of Gědhâlâ on his embassy to Heraclius. On the death
of Mâr-emmêh 644-647, he was elected Catholicus, and sat
until 657-658. See B. O., iii. 1, pp. 114,115,472; Hoffmann,
Auszüge, p. 226; Wright, Syr. Lit., p. 842.
<pb n="80"/>temple, the coming of Rabban Jacob to this Monastery
took place. And I, myself, having carefully investigated the
matter of the date, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="47"/> have found from the history of
Rabban Bar 'Idta' that the time of his coming was exactly
according to the word of the holy Rabban Isho-zěkhâ.³
Now when King Khusrau wished to build a con-
vent to Shirin' his wife, in the country of Bělêsh-
* Though famous among the Nestorians for having built
a magnificent temple at Bêth 'Abhê, he is equally famous
among the Jacobites for having by bribery and other means
prevented their building a church at Môşul. and bat
ܠܐܘܪ̈ܬܕܟܣܘ. ܕܨܒܝܢ ܗܘܘ ܠܡܒܢܐ ܥܕܬܐ ܒܡܘܨܠ. ܘܚܣܪܡܠܘܐܐܣܓܝܐܐ
.See Bar-Hebraeus, Claron .ܒܫܘܝܕܐ ܕܟܲܪܒ ܠܕܝܢ̈ܐܘܒܛܠܗܠܒܢܝܢܐ.
Eccles., ii, col. 127, and B. O., iii. 1, p. 144ff.
* See p. 38, and Thomas of Margà, Bk. 1, chap. 28, Bk 2, chap. 6.
3 A monk of Mount Izla, and the founder of Bêth Rabban.
See B. O., ii. 1, pp. 255,471,472.
was
* Bar 'Idtâ probably refers to the Church of Mâr Sergius.
The is mentioned in Guidi, Nuovo testo, p. 16, l. 2.
5 Shîrîn, a native of Ḥûzistân, was of Greek parentage and
a Christian. See B. O., iii. I, p. 109, but especially
Nöldeke, Geschichte der Perser, p. 283, note 2; p. 287, note 2;
and p. 357, note 4. In Guidi, Un nuovo testo Siriaco, p. 10,
Khusrau's two "Christian wives", are
distinctly mentioned; the one is called, and mix
Her favourite physician was Gabriel of Sinjâr
"who let blood from her arm, and who became as a son to her"
(Guidi, op. cit., p. 14.). Bar-Hebraeus states in his Chronicle of
Dynasties, (Bruns ed. p. 97. ll. 10,11, Bedjan ed. p. 92, ll. 23,24)
that Khusrau built three great temples to the Mother of God, the
Apostles, and Màr Sergius the Martyr, and that the Patriarch
ܪܗܘܡܝܐ the other
ܘܒܢܐ ܟܤܪܘ ܬܠܬܐ ܗܝܟܠܐ ܪ̈ܘܪܒܐ ,of Antioch consecrated them
ܠܝܠܕܬ ܐܠܗܐ ܘܠܫܠܝܚܐ ܘܠܡܪܝ ܣܪܓܝܣ ܣܗܕܐ܆ ܘܩܕܫ ܐܢܘܢ
and he adds that “Christianity_was spread ܦܛܪܝܪܟܐ ܕܐܢܛܝܟ.
but ;ܘܐܬܦܬܝܬ ܩܪܣܛܝܢܘܬܐ ܒܟܠܗ ܦܪܣ "abroad in all Persia
<pb n="81"/>
phår, he sent to the city of Edessa," to the good man of
worthy memory, Shamța, the son of the blessed Mår
Yazdin, telling him to bring from there copies of the
that he was a heathen at heart is evident from his unseemly
conduct in the Church at Dârâ. See Theophylactus 5. caps.
13.14, Evagrius vi. 21. (For an account of Sergius, who is
said to have suffered persecution in the reign of Maximian, see
Tillemont, Memoires, tom. v. pp. 73,282, and Butler, Lives of
the Saints, October 7.) Khusrau ascribed the pregnancy of his
best-loved wife Shirin to the power of Saint Sergius, but his
professions of Christianity appear rather to have been due to
the influence of the woman whose wit and beauty and gift of
singing are famous in the romances of the East, than to conviction.
The Boloreoipopa of Stephanus Byzantinus, i. e., the
town called by the Syrians and Arabski Halaḥ,
Hulwan, which was situated beyond the Tigris in Adiabene. It
was of some importance, and was one of the towns which had
the privilege of electing the patriarch. See Hoffmann, Auszüge,
p. 67, note 592, and p. 120; Nöldeke, Geschichte der Perser,
p. 134, note
,, now called Urfah. For the history of Edessa.
during the Vílth century see Duval, Histoire d'Edesse, p. 222ff.
For the account of Shamțá's position under Khusrau and
Sherowai, see Nöldeke, Geschichte der Perser, p. 383, note 3.
and for the narrative of his murder of Khusrau, see Thomas
of Marga, Bk. 1, chap. 33; and the authorities quoted by Nol
deke, op. cit., p. 382, note 1.
• See Assemȧni, B. O., iii. 1, p. 392. Yazdin, or "Yezdin
the tax-gatherer" was a prominent member of a powerful and
wealthy Christian family in the neighbourhood of Dastagerd,
and as far back as the end of the fifth century, a Nestorian
Synod was held in his ancestor's house at Karkha dhe Bêth
Slökh (Kerkuk). See Nöldeke, op. cit., p. 383, note 3; Bar-
Hebraeus, Chron. Eccles,, ii, col. 71. "Now at that time there
was well known in the gate of the king Yazdin of Karkha
dhe Bêth Garmai, and he was an advocate for the Church like
Constantine and Theodosius; and he built churches and mon-
1
<pb n="82"/>Holy Scriptures, and Prayer Books, and Lectionaries,
which were to belong to that convent. And after he
had gone there, and finished his business, he brought
with him for Rabban a large Service book, and he asked
for Rabban's prayers and set out for his own country.
And all the books which Rabban wrote with his own
hands, were [copied] from the service book which the
honourable Shamțâ brought to him, and in the greater
number of them may be found written thus, "Mar
Shamţâ, the son of Yazdin, the prince of believers, gave
this service book."
CHAPTER XXIV.
OF THE HONOURABLE BASTÔHMAGH, THE FATHER OF MAR
ISHO YAHBH,³ THE CATHOLICUS. *
Now Sâhdônâ, the writer of the "History of Rabban
Jacob," has omitted from his work many important
matters which he has made extraneous, as for example,
asteries everywhere.
And he was beloved by Khusrau
even as was Joseph in the sight of Pharaoh, and it is said that
on the morning of each day he used to send one thousand
✓ to the King." Yazdîn also sent money to rebuild the
churches at Jerusalem. See Guidi, Un nuovo testo Siriaco, pp. 17,22.
For the manner in which he acquired books at the capture
of Dârà see B. O., iii. 1, p. 451, col. I, at the top, al us,
من دارا كتبا كثيرة
etc.
* This name means "the man with a large family."
mann, Auszüge, note 1800.
3. e., sho-yahbh III. of Kuphlânâ in Adiabene.
B. O., iii. 1, p. 462, col. 2.
Hoff-
Lines 14-21, p. 47, and 11. 1-3, p. 48 are quoted in
5 See supra, p. 45, note 3.
67. e., which he has considered foreign to the purpose of
his work and has therefore omitted. We might read
(asi ásó
"and he has passed over them as foreign." See Payne
<pb n="83"/>
the coming of Rabban Mâr Åshö-zěkhá to this holy
man; the account concerning the fire which broke out
in the monastery' and to which he set limits, and it
was extinguished; and the account of the flood which
took place in the two valleys, against which he went
forth, and set bounds to it, and little by little he made
it go down until it subsided, that it might not tear up
the monastery and the temple in the first place in which
it was built. And concerning these things Mâr Gabriel'
wrote [also] in the metrical discourse which he composed
on Rabban Jacob, saying, "He straightway extinguished
the fire which broke out in the house of the monastery,
and he made to subside the flood which rushed down
to tear up its dwelling." <pb type="textAllignment"  n="48"/> And now, according
to [the omissions made] in those things which Rabban
Aphni-Maran wrote concerning him in his small history ³
of his triumphs, and according to what we have set
down in a preceding chapter* [from the history] which
Shělêmôn bar-Gâråph wrote,-from which the greatness
of this man Mâr Jacob is well made known-so also
will I omits what [I wish to omit] and will make ready to
write down the following story concerning the man, worthy
of remembrance and of fair renown among the righteous,
Bastôhmagh the nobleman, from the country of Ḥě-
Smith, Thesaurus, coll. 577,2783, and Nöldeke in Z.D. M. G. xxv,
p. 672. Hoffmann thinks that perhaps in Philoxenus -
Gr. παρῆλθη τὴν ἔξω.
3205 - the assembly or community of the monks.
* Gabriel, surnamed the 'Dancer', was born at Nisibis. He was
ordained by Şělîbha-zěkhâ at Kerkuk about A. D. 720. See
Thomas of Margâ Bk. 2, chap. 33 and B. O., iii. 1, pp. 460–462.
.ܒܬܫܥܝܬܐ Read 3
* Read
. Compare chap. 18, p. 41 (text).
ܫܩܩ ܐܢܐ Read ؛
<pb n="84"/>dhaiyabh. Now he possessed in this country some small
estates, among which was one called Bêth Ziwa," and
whether it was to visit his estates, or to be blessed by
Rabban, he was continually coming to him. And he
always passed over the King's Bridge, which was below
his village, the ruins of which are known to this day,
and came by Esṭwan, a village on the Zâbhâ (Zâb). And
it came to pass that once when he was passing over the
bridge, he saw some sorceresses washing clothes by the
Zab, and they were singing to each other the songs of
devils, and everything which was round about them danced
as they sang. Now as he drew near to them on his way a
small fragment of one of the refrains which they were
singing became fixed in his mind, and when he had
gone a short distance from them, he began to meditate
upon what he had heard. And straightway devils joined
themselves to him openly, and required of him, saying,
"Command us to do something which thou wishest us
to do."
Now when Basṭôhmagh saw this, he feared
greatly, and he acted craftily with them and said to
them, "Gather together these stones, and pile them in
a heap,"―now these stones are known to this day—"and
follow me whither I am going." <pb type="textAllignment"  n="49"/> And he drove
the mule upon which he was riding quickly along until
he came to the cell of the holy old man, and he said
Adiabene, The Syrians generally considered ܕܝܒ or ܚܕܝܒ ܃
this district to include all the land between the Upper and the
Lower Zab. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, note 1911.
Bêth Ziwà lay on the left bank of the Upper or Great
Zab, and as BasṬôhmagh used to cross the river by the King's
Bridge to visit Rabban Jacob, Bêth 'Abhê must have been
situated on the right bank, and at no great distance from the
river.
.ܕܒܪ ܗܘܐ ܒܓܫܠܐ Read ܀
<pb n="85"/>
to the devils, "Take this mule, and watch him until
I come out," and he went in trembling, and revealed
to Mar Jacob what had happened to him. And Rabban
answered and said to him, "Repeat before me what
thou hast heard," and while Basṭóhmagh was repeating,
Rabban wrote down upon the ground with his finger
what he heard. And when he had finished it all Rabban
made the sign of the cross over the writing, and said
to Basṭôhmagh, "Repeat once more what thou hast al-
ready repeated;" and he said to him, "I know nothing
of it whatever;" and Rabban answered, and said as he
laughed, "Rise up, and look after thy mule, for the
devils have loosed him and gone away."
CHAPTER XXV.
OF GREGORY OF TELL-BESME' [AND OF THE OFFICE OF
CATHOLICUS WHICH HE RECEIVED].
In my first apology I made known to thy wisdom
beforehand,³ O our brother, ['Abhd-Isho], that when I
had written down the memorials of the saints which
thou hadst entreated me to write, I should be obliged to
Syr. rendered “aromatarius" by Assemânî (B. O., iii. 1,
p. 472) and Payne Smith (Thes., col. 550). We should probably
point and translate, "the man from Tell-Besme" (See Hoff-
mann, Auszüge, p. 115). Tell-Besme, the
JA
of the Chronicle of Dionysius (B. O., I, p. 273), was situated.
to the west of Mârdîn, near Deyrik, and the ancient ruins of
this place are indicated on J. G. Taylor's map in Journal Geogr.
Soc. London, vol. 38, 1868, p. 355.
2 Read, with C,
+ Add some word like after
3 See supra, p. 19.
.ܥܘܗܕܢܗܘܢ
<pb n="86"/>insert also the memorials of others who were governors
of the Church in their times, where it was necessary,
in order that their period might be known, and that
[this] history might possess a consecutive, historical
narrative.
Now therefore³ at this period the blessed Mar
Sabhr-Isho was known to be the head of the Catholic
Church, and he served the office of head of the Patriarchate
for eight years, more or less, and he departed from
this world in the fourteenth year of king Khusrau in
the city of Nisibis, Mâr Isho-zěkhâ, the head of the
monastery, having departed this temporary life in the
thirteenth year [of this king].
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="50"/> Now when the valiant Khusrau had captured
the city of Dârâ' on the borders [of the Greek and
.ܡܢ ܕ omitting ܪܝܬܐ ܡܘܗܕܢܗܘܢ We might perhaps read 1
ܐܦ ܠܐܚܪܢܐ or ܐܦ ܕܠܐܚܪܬܐ Read -
3 Read of 0. This and the seven following clauses are
quoted in B. O., iii. I, p. 441, col. I.
* Sabhr-Isho was a native of Pêrôzàbhad
in Bêth
Garmai; he became Bishop of Lâshôm, and afterwards patriarch
in 596. He died in the year 604 at Nisibis. See B. O., ii,
p. 415; iii. 1, pp. 441-449; Bar-Hebraeus, Chron. Eccles., ii, 107;
Baethgen, Fragmente, pp. 36, 119; Wright, Syr. Lit., p. 838;
Guidi, Un nuovo testo Siriaco, pp. 10,15.
5 Read
6 A. D. 604. He was buried in the monastery which he
built at la B. O., ii, p. 415, col. 2.
7 I. c., or ½, Arab. 1515, Aápas “between the borders"
(), or Dårå of the marches, is situated about eight
hours' ride to the S. E. of Mârdîn. It was built on the eastern
frontier of the Roman empire towards Assyria with the view
of checking the invasions of the Persians. For an account of
its fortifications see Procopius, Bello Persico, ii. 13. "Dara con-
tinued more than sixty years to fulfil the wishes of its
<pb n="87"/>
Persian territory], in the fifteenth year of his reign,'
the Christians demanded from him a Catholicus; and
the king commanded that the blessed Gregory, Metro-
politan of the city of Nisibis, whom Mâr Sabhr-isho
improperly had cast forth into exile,-which act is spoken
of in terms of condemnation in the Church until this
day should be appointed Catholicus. But certain of
the teachers and believing men by whom this matter
Iwas to have been carried out, acted with deceit against
the blessed Gregory, because they were afraid of the
immeasurable zeal which that blessed man possessed.
Now there was in Mâḥôzê' a certain expositor called
founders, and to provoke the jealousy of the Persians, who
incessantly complained, that this impregnable fortress had been
constructed in manifest violation of the treaty of peace between
the two empires." Gibbon, Decline, chap. 40. Concerning the
first fortification of Dârâ by the Greeks see Wright, Joshua
the Stylite, p. 70. Ibn Batutah describes it as "very old, white
in appearance, with a lofty fortress which is now ruined" (ed.
Defrémery et Sanguinetti, ii, p. 142). The ruins have been
well described by Sachau in his Reise in Mesopotamien, pp. 394,395.
Bar-Hebraeus states that Dârâ was captured by Khusrau
A. Gr. 915 A. D. 604, after a siege of nine months, and that
Sabhr-isho, who was with him, died there during the siege
Chron. Eccles., ii. 107. According to Guidi (Nuovo testo Siriaco,
p. 14, 1. 18) Khusrau captured Dârâ in the fourteenth year
of his reign.
2 "the double city" i. e., Seleucia and
Ctesiphon which were situated on both banks of the Tigris
about twenty miles below Bagdad. Seleucia was on the right,
and Ctesiphon on the left bank of the river. Within the last
six years the building on one side of the famous Arch of
Khusrau has fallen, and the destruction of the whole ruin may be
expected to follow in a short time, for the fine large bricks
are carried away continually in boat loads to build new
houses and walls.
<pb n="88"/>Gregory, and in respect of him they acted subtilly,
and made him Catholicus without the Will of the Holy
Spirit, Who [alone] perfecteth the holy things connected
with the Holy Church according to His Will. And
certain other men, [who] had not acted justly in the
matter of Gregory [of Nisibis], but who felt it right to
acquiesce in what had been done until the Lord had
worked out His Will, or until Gregory had ended his
life, and had passed out of the world, wrote letters of
accusation, and painted pictures [in which they repre-
sented] Gregory' feeling a hen³ [to see] if it was fat
[enough] for his food. And the other bishops [acted]
in various ways, which it is not seemly to describe,
and they brought these painted drawings and the letters
of accusation before King Khusrau.
* Bar-Hebraeus (Chron. Eccles., ii 107) describes him as a
native of Kashkar, and a doctor in the Church of Seleucia.
He was an avaricious man, and his disciples bore a bad name
for which he was much reproached, not only by his own people
but by the Persian nobles. He died four years after he was
ordained Catholicus, and was buried in Seleucia. The Persians
then subjected his disciples to torture until they revealed the
hiding-place of all the money which their master had collected.
Gregory is No. 28 in the list of the Eastern Catholics given
by Solomon of Başra in the Book of the Bee, (ed. Budge,
p. 117). Gregory of Seleucia was appointed by the influence
of Shirin and her physician Gabriel of Sinjar; compare
ܐܬܬܣܝܡ ܩܬܘܠܝܩܐ ܓܪܝܓܘܪ ܦܪܬܝܐ ܒܡܥܒܕܢܘܬܗܿ ܕܝܪܝܢ ܕܐܝܬܘܗܝ ܗܘܐ ܒܪ ܐܬܪܞ
ܥܡ ܡܠܟܐ. ܠܓܪܝܓܘܪ ܟܟܪܝܐ ܕܐܬܛܪܕ ܡܢ ܢܨܝܒܝܢ ܒܥܝܢ
ܟܕ ܛܒ ܒܢ̈ܝ ܥܕܬܐ ܟܠܗܘܢ
.15 .Guidi, Nuoto testo, p ܗܘܘ. ܘܕܒܪ ܒܪܫܢܘܬܗ ܕܘܒܪ̈ܐ ܕܠܐ ܫܦܝܪ̈ܝܢ܀
2 Note 6 refers to a
.ܩܨܪܘܗܝ
(p. 50, 1. 13) and not to
3 Perhaps alluded to in Guidi, Nuovo testo, p. 11.
<pb n="89"/>
OF THE STAGNATION OF THE CHURCH AFTER THE DEATH OF
MAR SABHR-ISHO THE CATHOLICUS.
Now when the king heard and saw these things,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="51"/> and had learned that the Christians had not
enthroned as Catholicus the Gregory whom he had
commanded, but had craftily set up another, he forgot
all his love and friendship for the Christians, especially
that which he had for Sabhr-Isho, and he cursed them
angrily, [saying,] 'Gregory' shall not minister as head';
and he swore by the Sun, his god, saying, "As long
as I live I will never have another patriarch³ in the
country of the East," which [threat] he actually carried
out, for the disciple of Satan contrived carefully that
the holy priesthood should be removed from the
Christians of the country of his rule. And since there
was no father to beget, the children who had been
born came to an end little by little and ceased; and
so, until Khusrau died by the sword of the Christian
children of the Church, the holy Church remained without
a Patriarchate. And no Bishops and no Metropolitans
This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, pp. 90,91.
2 Gregory died in the nineteenth year of the reign of
Khusrau A. D. 608-609.
3 About this time the famous physician Gabriel of Sinjâr
flourished. As he was a Jacobite and had great influence with
Khusrau, and was a bitter foe (20) of the Nestorians, it
is probable that the king's unreasoning oath was due, in a
great measure, to this man's power over him. It is certain
that for eighteen years the Nestorians had no patriarch. See
Bar-Hebraeus, Chron. Eccles., ii. 109 and note I. The whole
question of the appointment of Gregory of Kashkar as Cathol-
icus being a concession to Shîrîn the Queen and Gabriel of
Sinjar is fully discussed by Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 118-121.
m
<pb n="90"/>were consecrated, and the holy Church endured grief
through the absence of the head and governor, and
father of fathers, the Patriarch.
CHAPTER XXVII.
OF MAR BABHAI,2 AND OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL VISITATION
WHICH HE UNDERTOOK. ³
At this time, among the company of the monks,
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. I, p. 91, col. If.
I. e., Bàbhai of Bêth 'Aináthà in Bêth Zabhdai, to be
distinguished from Bâbhai bar-Nesibhnâyê. See supra, p.46, note 4.
The duty which Már Bábhai undertook was the inspector-
ship of monasteries. It will be remembered that about the
middle of the sixth century Hannȧnå of Adiabene, the successor
of Joseph Hůzȧyà in the school of Nisibis, had attacked the
doctrines of Theodore of Mopsuestia, and had declared his
intention of following the views of Chrysostom. As he was a
teacher of importance and had a following of eight hundred
pupils, the Nestorian Church ran a great risk of an internal schism.
The views which he brought forward were condemned at a
synod held under Îsho'-yahbh of Arzôn, (581-595), and at
another presided over by his successor Sabhr-Ishő (596-604).
Joseph of Hazzà or Arbèl adopted the opinions of Hannanȧ,
and his example was quietly followed by a large number of
monks and others, and after the death of Gregory of Kashkar
the Metropolitans of Nisibis, Adiabene, and Kerkûk persuaded
Mâr Bàbhai that it was his bounden duty to visit all the
Nestorian convents, and to expel all such as inclined to, or
professed, the views of Hannânȧ and Joseph of Hazza, together
with any of the Měşalleyânê or "praying" monks who might
be found therein. Mår Bâbhai was qualified for his task in
every way, and the manner in which he carried it out is
warmly praised by Thomas of Margâ who, no doubt, expressed
the general opinion of the Nestorian Church at this period on
this subject. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 116-121; Wright,
Syr. Lit., p. 842, col. I and the authorities quoted by him.
See Guidi, Nuovo testo, p. 17, L. 18.
<pb n="91"/>
there flourished in doctrine and in a life of excellence,
the blessed Már Bábhai the Great. Now these Metro-
politans who were allied to one another, Mår Cyriacus'
of Nisibis, Mar Yônádhábh of Adiabene, and Mâr
Gabriel of Karkhá dhé Béth Slokh wrote-now by
that time holy monasteries had been built, and they
feared the wicked doctrine of the Mèşalleyânė, and the
blackness of the religion of the heretics <pb type="textAllignment"  n="52"/>, lest
these regions round about should be sown by the hus-
bandmen of the Evil One, and it was not easy for them
to visit the churches through fear of the government,
lest Khusrau by. whom the Patriarch had been estab-
See B. O., ii, p. 416, col. 1. For the letter which sho'-
yahbh III. wrote to him see B. O., ii. 1, p. 141,, col. 2, p. 142,
col. 1 (Nos. 41 and 46). According to 'Abhd-Isho' he wrote
* 2000 ppo pup so 2052 2a
"an
exposition on Faith and the Mysteries (Sacraments), the cause
of the Nativity and Epiphany, and a commentary on Saint
Paul". See B. O., iii. 1, p. 215. He was a member of the
Mission to Heraclius. See Thomas of Margå Bk. ii, chap. 4.
For the letters of Isho'-yahbh III. to Gabriel see B. O., iii. I,
pp. 114, 141, 142.
The called by the Greeks exóμevoι or EUXĪTAL
Euchites, . ., "those who pray", were a sect of heretics who
sprang up in Mesopotamia in the third quarter of the fourth
century and spread themselves over Syria and other places;
their doctrines were current as late as the twelfth century.
They believed that each man received from his ancestors at
birth a demon which always led him on to evil. Baptism, they
thought, was able to lop off the external branches of sin, but
it could never eradicate the demon from the soul in which it
I was the cause of sin. Prayer was the only means by which
the demon could be exorcised, and to do this effectually a
man must pray without ceasing, for in that alone could per-
<pb n="92"/>lished should act deceitfully with them, and they be de-
livered over to dangers-to persuade the holy man and
teacher of the Church, Mâr Bâbhai, that as it was
evident to every one that he was a solitary and not
a bishop, as long as our Lord was ordering a change
in His grace towards the Church, he should visit the
monasteries, and convents, and monks, and repair³ the
breaches and drive out and expel from the Church him
that was sick and broken in wickedness. And these
three Metropolitans did this, and they all wrote letters
and entreaties to him, and he, like a prosperous labourer
and a vigorous soldier of the faith, ministered unto the
Church, and guarded it, and glorified it until the murder
of the wicked King Khusrau. And after a Catholicus
was ordained he dwelt in quietness in his cell.
fection be found. Of them Epiphanius (Haer. 80) says "toti in
orationes intenti cetera negligebant, et, abjectis propter falsam
Evangelii interpretationem, bonis fortunae, otiosi errabant per vicos
ac plateas, viris promiscue cum mulieribus dormientibus." They
refused to work, and wandered from city to city begging their
daily bread; their profession and occupation in life was "prayer."
Bar-Hebraeus (Chron. Eccles., i. 573) calls them so.
See B. O., i, p. 128, col. 2, (where they are mentioned by
Ephraem Syrus together with a number of other heretical sects);
Assemànî, Dissertatio de Syris Nestorianis (B. O., iii. 2,
p. CLXXII ff.; iii. I, p. 101, col. 2, at the top); and Cotelerius,
Eccles. Graec. Monumenta, t. I, p. 302ff. A good account of
the Meşalleyânê is given by Tillemont, Mémoires Ecclésiastiques,
t. viii, pp. 222-226; and see especially Guidi, Ostsyrische
Bischöfe, in Z. D. M. G., Bd. xliii, p. 391.
* Read bar.
ܣܘܓ Read -
<pb n="93"/>
CHAPTER XXVIII.'
THE APOLOGY OF THE AUTHOR TO HIM WHO WOULD ASK
A QUESTION.
If now any contentious man, or anyone peaceably
disposed should ask, "Had not these great Metropoli-
tans power to put an end to the wickedness which was
springing up in their dominions without [the help of]
Mår Bâbhai?" [I answer] Yes, but every Metropolitan
is not necessarily a doctor, neither can every doctor
know [how to decide] all questions in dispute, nor can
every doctor sucessfully contend against all the various
false religions; one doctor hath one quality, and another
doctor has another. In the holy Mår Bâbhai, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="53"/>
however, all these various qualities were found: [the
power of] arguing against heresies; [the power of]
interpreting the Scriptures; [the power of] commenting
upon the writings of the Fathers, and of investigating
the matters in them which required searching out.
And thou mayest learn concerning all his varied learning
if thou wilt read the books which he composed; now
eighty and four³ of his works on various subjects are
preserved, and are held in honour by the holy Church.
And also, the foul heresy of the Meşalleyânê began
with monks, and it was even right that by monks it
should be detected, as being those to whom the
visitations of grace are [especially] manifest and
The first 12 lines of the text of this chapter are quoted
in B. O., . 1, p. 91, col. 1.
2 Read 2007 2000.
3 For the list of them by 'Abhd-Ìsho' see B. O., iii. 1. 94.
<pb n="94"/>the crafty workings of the devils which come upon
monks who keep in the quietness of the cell. And also
when the heresy of the Melchisedekians' broke out
at Scete in the land of Egypt through the contemptible
monks who said that Melchisedek was the son of God,"
forsee B. O., i. 386, 1. 20.
The Melchisedekians were a sect founded by one Theodotus
They first believed that
μεγάλην τινα καὶ θείαν
an usurer who lived about A. D. 174.
Christ was a mighty, divine power,
duváuiv, and later this power was identified with the Holy
Ghost. To these views they added the opinion that Melchise-
dek had neither father nor mother, and that his beginning and end
were incomprehensible (See Theodoret, Haer. fab. ii. 6; and
Epiphanius Haer. Iv.). St. Jerome proved that Melchisedek
Iwas a man, and the governor of a district in Palestine (Tille-
mont, Memoires, iii. p. 32). In the Book of the Bee (ed. Budge
p. 35) it is said that Melchisedek was the son of Malaḥ (in
Bezold, Schatzhöhle, p. 36 Målåkh) the grandson of Shem the
son of Noah, and that his mother's name was Yôzàdàķ. On
a marginal note of the MS of the Book of the Bee which I
called A (fol 39a) the name of Melchisedek's father is given
as Harklêim, and that of his mother Shěláthéil, a, .
The passages from the lexx. quoted by Payne Smith (Thes.
col. 2146) add that "he sprang from foreign peoples, and on
this account [the names of his parents were not written in the
[Book of] Generations, according to the words of Paul (Hebrews
vii. 3). And the names of his parents were made known by
revelation to the old man in the desert of Scete who, in his
simplicity, meditated upon these things, by the counsel of
Theophilus, Archbishop of Alexandria." For the account of
the solitary who was brought by Cyril to Alexandria to con-
sult God concerning Melchisedek's origin, see Cotelerius, Eccles.
Grace. Mon., tom. i, pp. 423.424; and Tillemont, Mémoires, iii.
p. 32.
<pb n="95"/>
although there were doctors' and famous bishops in their
days, yet Theophilus,* Bishop of Alexandria, allowed
the blessed Abbâ Macarius, a monk, to make a refut-
ation of this error; and that holy man actually did so,
and made manifest the foolishness of their opinion.
So also in the following affair which happened³ in the
holy Monastery of Rabban Şelibhâ, which is situated
by the side of Hêghlâ* Omêd, a village on the river
Tigris, to the brethren Abhâ and Thomas and Bar-
'Idtâ, the solitary brethren³ and ascetics, who lived in
that monastery. They were by craft falsely accused
of being Meşalleyânê, although they were in no wise
allied to them, and they were ascribed to their sect by
certain men who, being envious of their strict and
ascetic manner of life, wrote letters concerning them
to the holy Mar Ḥěnán-isho, the Catholicus, when he
1 Better
2007 Aut.
6
2 He became Bishop of Alexandria A. D. 385. See Sozomen,
Hist. Eccles., vii. 14; Socrates, Hist. Eccles., v. 12.
3 The remainder of this chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. I,
p. 218, col. 1.
I. c., le, see Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 238, note 1897. Hêglà
Omêd is a Persian name compounded of Héglà, and Omêd-
✓ "hope". Compare by "Hoffnung auf Gott".
in Horn and Steindorff, Sassanidische Siegelsteine, (in Mitthei
lungen aus den Orientalischen Sammlungen, Berlin, 1891.) p. 28,
at the top.
5 Read, or 250.
6 Ḥenân-Isho I. surnamed the 'Lame' 2 was ordained
A. D. 685, and having sat for fourteen years died in the Mon-
astery of Jonah at Nineveh A. D. 699. For a list of his works
see B. O., iii. 1, p. 154, and for an account of his dispute
with John, Metropolitan of Nisibis, surnamed the 'Leper', see'
B. O., ii, pp. 421–424.
<pb n="96"/>was in the Monastery of Mar Jonah the Prophet at Nineveh.
Now he knowing that he was' by all manner of means
bound to enquire into this matter, wrote for them, and
they came to him. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="54"/> And he answered and said
to them, "My brethren, I have never mixed myself up
in those matters which concern the manner of life of
monks, and inasmuch as I have no knowledge whatever
of these things of which ye are held to be guilty, let these
matters of which ye are accused be searched into by the
hands of men like unto yourselves." And he wrote
letters and sent them by their hands to this our con-
vent of Bêth ‘Âbhê, when the holy Mâr George' bar-
Şayyâdê was the head, and the old men of the con-
gregation were Abbâ Nathaniel,3 Abba Selîbhâ, and
Abhrôi, and Gabriel who was surnamed Şephrônâs
Read, with Vat.,
No.
* "George, the son of fishermen" came from the village of
Neshrain Adiabene, and was Abbot of Bêth 'Abhê about
A. D. 590. He was buried in the martyrium of this convent
with Nathaniel, Şelibhà, and Gabriel surnamed Şephrônà; see
Thomas of Margà, Bk. ii, chap. 20. His life was written by
David the Bishop at the request of a Persian nobleman in the
'Book of the Little Paradise'; see Thomas of Margå, Bk. ii,
chap. 24. According to 'Abhd-Isho' he wrote the "Book of
Obedience," ; B. O., ifi. 1, p. 217.
3 He wrote a commentary on the Psalms of David, and
treatises against the followers of Severus of Antioch, the
Manicheans and other heretics. See B. O., iii. I, p. 224.
+ According to Thomas of Margà, Bk. ii, chap. 20, he
became Abbot of Bêth 'Àbhê.
I. e., "Little Sparrow" is explained in Or. 2441
fol. 3196. col. I by
"A kind of bird
which sings before rain."
<pb n="97"/>
and many others. And when they had been lovingly
examined by their brethren, and had manifested before
them visitations of grace remote from all error, [the
brethren of Beth ‘Âbhê] wrote letters by their hands
to Mâr Catholicus [informing him of this]; and thus in
justification remote from all falsehood of mind, those
blessed men returned to their cells by the command
of Mar Catholicus. This then is the reason why the
fathers who lived in the time of Mår Båbhai required
of him to rule the Church, especially the congregations
of solitaries.
CHAPTER XXIX.'
OF THE COMING OF MÂR BÂBHAI TO THIS MONASTERY [OF
BETH ABHE], AND OF THE MIRACLE WHICH WAS WROUGHT
BEFORE HIM IN THE TEMPLE.
Now when the blessed Mår Båbhai was going round
from village to village, and from monastery to mon-
astery, visiting, and asking questions, and making
enquiries concerning the orthodoxy of belief, and the
soundness of the opinions in the minds of all the monks
and heads of monasteries to whom he came, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="55"/>
he was pleased³ also to enter into this our monastery.
Now he did not ask questions here on matters of belief,
nor did he require from Rabban Jacob the results of
his deliberations, for he was thoroughly well convinced
concerning his doctrine and of the correctness of the
The first sixteen lines of this chapter are quoted in
B. O., iii. 1, p. 473.
ܐܨܛܒ Read 2
n
<pb n="98"/>actions of his holiness; for he looked with his dis-
cerning eye, and he saw the manner of the life which
he led, and he smelled from him the savour of grace
which entereth into the chambers of the soul, and
maketh glad all its powers. And he required from
Rabban "that he would abolish the glorious order of
the service of readings which were read on the holy
first days of the week in honour of the atoning Mysteries,
inasmuch as it was not a thing appropriate for monks,
but only for the clergy and the laity. For the solitaries
are teachers, and are all occupied continually with the
Scriptures, and courses of readings are therefore super-
fluous for them. They have no need of command-
ments, nor of the dispensation of God which is especially
intended for the laity,' which they were originally.
And moreover in this work there are questions and
answers and speaking, and not every monk is able
to guard his mind and his tongue equally well outside
his cell as before he came out; but I would wish and
desire that the monks should go forth to the congregation
from their cells keeping silence, and that they should
return to their cells in silence, as a guard for the tongue
which is the storehouse of words." The holy Mar
Jacob said to him, "To-day let us perform the Holy
Mysteries in the customary manner, and let us rejoice
in the participation in the body of Christ our Lord,
[before] thou departest from us, and let us read the read-
ings and not change the order of our service; and
whatsoever pleaseth the Lord let us do whilst thou
And this speech was pleasing in the sight
art here."
of Mar Bâbhai.
Now there was in the martyrium - a
Read
<pb n="99"/>
certain man smitten with the palsy who had never
walked, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="56"/> but he used to crawl along supporting
himself upon his hands, and [when] he raised up his
body, he supported all his weight upon his hands. And
when the service of the Mysteries had begun, Rabban
sent the man sick of the palsy to crawl into the temple,
and he also selected for reading the passage from that
part of the Gospels where our Lord commanded the
paralytic to walk;' and he gave it to one of his dis-
ciples and commanded him to read it. And the
paralytic crawled along and went into the temple, and
the holy Mår Bâbhai saw him. And it came to pass
that as the reader was reading, when he came to that
passage in which Jesus Christ says to the man sick of
the palsy, "I say unto thee, O paralytic, arise, and take
up thy bed, and go to thy house," the man sick of
the palsy leaped up in the midst of the temple, and
stood upon his feet; and wonder and astonishment
seized all the brethren, and they all turned to the
glorifying of God the Lord of all. And Mar Bábhai
especially fell into wonder and amazement, and he
knew and understood that this miracle had, for a long
time past, been reserved for the holy Mâr Jacob to
work on the day when necessity required it, that it
might be a bridle and a thing wherewith to silence
those who wished to abolish the order of service which
his holiness had established in the congregation under
his rule. And Mâr Bâbhai, and those who were with
him, rejoiced and were glad and confirmed his order
of service, and praised the ordinances of Rabban; and
In the text p. 56, note 2, read St. Matthew ix. 6.
<pb n="100"/>the blessed Mâr Bâbhai went forth from this monastery,
full of joy and praise, to visit the other monasteries
which yet remained to be visited.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="57"/>
CHAPTER XXX.
OF THOSE TRIED AND APPROVED MEN WHO BECAME DIS-
CIPLES OF RABBAN MÂR JACOB IN THIS MONASTERY
[OF BETH ABHE].
Now wishing to write concerning the upright children
of an upright father, and the noble heirs to the inheritance
of a noble man, and the glorious disciples of a glorious
father, it falleth to me first of all to give utterance to
the sayings of the wise man," "The righteous man who
walketh in integrity, blessed are his children after him;"³
"for the joy of the righteous man worketh judgment,"+
"and his noble deeds are spoken of by his seed". And
again, “The father of the righteous man shall rejoice,
and if a father begets a wise man he will rejoice in
him." And seeing that his own goodness was handed
down as a goodly heritage to his children, the righteous
Iman Mår Jacob died; but perhaps he did not die, for
he left many behind him like unto himself, concerning
whom, by the hand of the Lord I make ready to write.
And the departure of their father was not grievous
unto them, because during his lifetime, they rejoiced
him by the beauty of their manner of life, and they
promised him that they would keep his command-
* Literally, "one who maketh to inherit."
2 Read
* Proverbs xxi. 15.
3 Proverbs xx. 7.
s Proverbs xxiii. 24.
<pb n="101"/>
ments for ever. And on his departure he also blessed
them, and laid his holy hands upon their heads, and
they bowed down' at the top of his staff at the time
of his going away out of their midst. Now, according
to what is written in the history of him, a large con-
gregation became disciples of Rabban, eighty men in
number, whose names are written in the Book of Life.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="58"/>
CHAPTER XXXI. 3
OF ABBA JOHN THE ELDER.
Now firstly it is known to us that the holy Abbâ
John was an Elder and ascetic from the country of
Beth Garmai. He was a fellow-labourer and companion
of Abba Jacob his father, and in carrying out com-
pletely all the glorious actions of an ascetic life, he
was a pure mirror of all beautiful things, for all his
contemporaries. Now concerning this man the holy
Mår Jacob commanded that he should become head of
the monastery after him; and when he resisted, and
would not consent to this, he was compelled by ab-
solute necessity to become the head of this congregation.
Concerning him the holy Mâr Åshöyahbh, when he was
Bishop of Nineveh, wrote to this monastery, because
Reading with A. p.
2 Assemânî has (B. O., iii. 1, p. 203, cols. 1 and 2) p.
3 This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, pp. 203, and 474.
* Delete: before
made at Al-Kôsh,
5 The text of this letter, edited from two modern copies
of sho'-yahbh's Letters which I had
is given at the end of this chapter.
In it sho-yahbh
<pb n="102"/>on account of Abbâ John's obstinate refusal the monks
[of Beth 'Abhê] wished to appoint another head of the
monastery in his stead. And concerning Abba John'
Sâhdonà made a second funeral oration upon him which
begins "A little time before, when we were following
our father to the grave."³
Now when the blessed man had been head of the
monastery for half a year, according to what I have
learned from the aged Elders of whom I was a con-
temporary here, he forsook the monastery and departed
secretly to the country of Bêth Garmai, to a mountain
to the south east of the village of Dakok, to a place con-
venient for a life of contemplation, where, finally, the Mon-
astery called 'Bêth Ḥazķiel' was built. Now this Ḥazķiels
(Ezekiel) was the disciple of Khodhàhwai' of Bêth Hale'
gently chides the monks of Bêth 'Abhê because they had not
consulted him in the matter of the election of a successor to
Mâr Jacob, and he advises them to appoint Abbâ John whom
Mar Jacob had nominated as his successor before he died. Ìsho'-
yahbh recommends the monks to appoint Abbȧ John on account
of his having been a monk for seventy years.
.ܕܥܠܘܗܝ Assemani has *
For the list of his works see chap. xxxiv (infra, pp. 110-112).
3 His first funeral oration was written upon Mâr Jacob of
Bêth 'A bhê.
* Dàķôk Ta'ûk. See supra p. 44, note 1. See also Mai,
Script. Vet. Nova Coll., t. x, p. 296.
5 See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 274; B. O., iii. I, pp. 203,
204 and note 1.
6 Assemânî writes is and was (B. O., iii. 1,
pp. 151,203). 400-Pers. 122 "god".
Arab. ýɩ (B. O., iii. 1, p. 155, col. 2, l. 9) —
(B. O., iii. I, p. 205, col. 2, note 2). This monastery
I was situated in al-Haditha near Môşul.
<pb n="103"/>
and a contemporary of Abbâ John,' and he was greatly
strengthened and enlightened in his knowledge and
manner of life by the conversation and sight of that
holy man; thus by the work of Rabban Ezekiel and
the prayers of Abba John that holy monastery was
built, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="59"/> and in it Abbâ John ended his days and
was buried in peace. And Rabban Ezekiel wrote to
this monastery to encourage and cherish our love and
good will towards them, saying, "May mutual love
and fellowship between these two monasteries be
preserved to the end of days." And I affirm and bear
witness, as before God, that I learned this from Narsai
the Elder, who was surnamed Dadh Ishő, from the
village of 'Ain Barkė,' and also from an Elder who
belonged to the monastery of Beth Ḥazkiel, when in
the days of my youth I was copying letters before the
Patriarchal throne of the holy Már Abraham," the
Catholicus and Patriarch. And this love was preserved
so entirely, that of everything in that monastery, of
fruits and any good things which were not to be found
here, the brethren of that monastery used to send some
here, and the brethren of this monastery used to send
'Abbâ John wrote a history of Khodhâhwai. See B. O., iii. I,
p. 204.
2 I. e., the monks of Rabban Ezekiel.
3 A village in the diocese of Margâ. See B. O., iii. 1,
pp. 204, 492.
4 Mâr Abraham sat from A. D. 837-850. He was origin-
ally a monk in Bêth 'Abhê, and afterwards became Abbot
of that monastery; he next became Bishop of Haditha, and
was finally elected Patriarch. See B. O, iii. I, p. 508,
note 1.
<pb n="104"/>there, for the sake of Abba John,' and for the sake
of the holy Mar Jacob, for they both came from
there.
MAR ISHO YAHBH TO THE MONKS OF BETH 'ABHE ON THE
ELECTION OF A HEAD.
Letter from Mir ishd'-yahbh to Sitnon, John, Kam-isho,
Bar-Denhà, Daniel and the other brethren of the Monastery of
Bêth 'Abhê concerning the appointment of John the Elder as
head of the monastery.
ܐܕܠܘܬ ܐܚܐ ܕܒܥܘܡܪܗ܆ ܡܛܠ ܩܘܝܡܗ ܕܪܫܐ. ܠܪ̈ܚܡܝ ܐܠܗܐ ܐܚܝ ܚܒܝܡܐ ܘܪܚܝܡܐ.
ܕܒܨܪܬܗܘܢ
ܩܪܐ
ܩܒܥܬܘܢ.
⚫ He wrote certain chapters on heads of knowledge, institut-
ions for beginners, a short Chronicle, a history of Mår Khodhâhwai,
ܤܡ ܪ̈ܝܫܐ ܕܩܪܝܢ ܕܝܕܥܬܐ. a discourse upon him, and some hymns
Syr. Lit., 843.
See B. O., iii. 1, pp. 203-205; and Wright,
.ܡܪܝ ܚܙܩܝܐܝܠ Read -
This letter is number 17 of those written while Isho'-yahbh
of Adiabene was Bishop of Nineveh.
<pb n="105"/>
ܦܛܪܝܪܟܝܣܝ ܐܬܚܙܝ ܠܝ ܕܒܓܪܬܐ ܕܣܘܪܗܒܐ ܐܬܚܫܚ
ܕܚܘܒܟܘܢ
ܘܠܒܪ ܬܪܒܚܐ
ܠܡܠܬܗ
ܡܒܪܟܐ ܕܠܙܒܢܞ ܐܡܪܞܙ ܐܠܐ ܛܝܒܘܬܗ
ܕܚܣܝܘܬܗ. ܘܐܢ ܐܢܫ ܡܢ ܚܨܝܦܘܬܗ ܕܗܢܐ ܡܢܟܪܐ ܢܦܫܗ ܒܨܒܝܗ: ܕܩܢܛܐ ܐܬܞ.
ܐܢ ܠܐ ܪܘܒܕ ܥܘܕܪܢܐ ܕܨܠܘܬܗ ܕܙܕܝܩܐ ܐܢܕܝܢ ܐܦ ܡܕܡ ܕܕܠܩܘܒܠܐ ܢܬܪܢܐ: ܠܡܢܣ
<pb n="106"/>ܩܫܝܫܐ. ܗ̇ܘ ܕܒܘܩܝܐ- ܕܡܝܬܪܘܬܗ ܩܒܥܝܢ ܫܢ̈ܝܐ ܚܣܝܪ ܩܠܝܠ ܐܬܝܗܒ. ܬܠܬܝܢ ܡܗܝܢ
ܒܘܝܘܬܐ ܢܪܡܐ. ܝܨܦܘ ܗܟܝܠ ܐܘ ܐܚܝ
ܢܬܩܕܡ
ܒܣܟܠܘܬܐ.
ܘܢܣܕܘܩ ܫܘܝܘܬܟܘܢ
ܐܢܐ ܕܝܢ ܒܕܡܦܣ ܐܢܐ ܒܣܓܝܐܘܬ ܣܩܘܒܠܐ ܕܡܪܕܝܢ ܠܡܓܕܫ ܒܪ̈ܒܐ ܕܐܝܟ ܗܠܝܢ. ܘܒܞܝ
ܒܝܢܬܟܘܢ. ܐܬܡܨܐ ܐܝܟ
ܚܝܠܝ
ܤܘܘܚܗ ܕܪܢܝܢ ܒܪܓܬܐ ܕܛܒܬܟܘܢ، ܘܕܟܠܗ̇ ܒܛܝܠܘܬܝ ܗܕܐ ܐܝܬܝܞ. ܕܐܢܬܘܢ ܫܦܝܪ
<pb n="107"/>
ܗܟܝܠ ܕܕ ܬܕܥܘܢ ܠܗܠܝܢ. ܐܬܚܦܛܘ ܐܟܚܕܐ ܠܡܛܪ ܐܘܝܘܬܐ ܕܪܘܚܐ ܒܚܙܩܐ
CHAPTER XXXIL.
OF RABBAN JOSEPH [OF BETH KOKA]' AND OF RABBAN
ABRAHAM HIS BROTHER.
How can any man praise these two blessed brethren
worthy of all blessedness? How can any man crown
these pillars of light, whose rays are more glorious
than those of the sun? How can we [sufficiently]
admire and praise [these] sons of one father and one
mother, [who are to be compared with] the [seven]
sons of the blessed woman Shamóni?" They were
brought up under the same care, and they enjoyed
the same spiritual instruction. These blessed men came
from the village of Gâphithâ, which is situated to the
north of this monastery, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="60"/> a journeys of about
This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 227.
2 Near the Upper or Great Zâb in Adiabene.
3 According to 'Abhd-1sho' he wrote a book of 'various
.227 .B. 0., iii. I, p ܐܒܪܗܡ ܐܝܬ ܠܗ ܟܬܒܐ ܕܫܘܐܠܐ ܡܪܬܒܐ. .'questions
* The text of this passage is corrupt, and it is perhaps better
to follow the reading of the Vatican MS. Hoffmann offers as
ܠܒܢܝ ܚܕ ܐܒܐ ܘܚܕܐ ܐܡܐ܆ ܐܝܟܢ܆ ܕܐܝܟ ܒܒܢ̈ܞ ܕܛܘܒܢܝܬܐ ܫܡܘܢܝ an altemative
See 2 Maccabees vii. I; and Wright, Catalogu ܢܬܗܪܘܢ܆ ܟܫܒܚ
Syr. AMSS., pp. 185, col. 2.
.ܡܪܕܐ but read ,ܡܪܪܐ s All the MSS. have
<pb n="108"/>2
four miles. From their youth up they were disciples
in this monastery of the divine man Mâr Jacob, and
everything which philosophy required and demanded,
they received from the teaching of that blessed' man.
Now the holy Abbâ Joseph, on his departure from the
[service of] the monastery, came forth to this laura, ³
and lived the life of a solitary in it, and never came
to the temple even on the day of the assembly. But
at eventide, when it was quite dark, and no one could
see him, he used to come and go into the refectory,
and through a large opening that was built there,-
which I also remember in that old refectory.—the
blessed man used to take, and very old men have
also related this to me,-as much as he needed of the
hard, burnt crusts, and of the pieces of bread which
had dropped from the oven, and had been cast out,
and depart to his cave. And when the blessed Mar
Jacob departed this temporary life, Abbâ Joseph took
his brother with him, and the two of them departed
to Mount Zînai, 4 where they led an ascetic life, and
performed unnatural austerities. And inasmuch as
Rabban Aphni-Mâran' and Rabban Sabhr-Åshö, who
was surnamed Rôsṭâm,6 have written histories con-
Read
I. e., the general work in the monastery which every
novice was bound to take part in for a certain time.
.ܠܚܝܟܬܐ Read 3
* This mountain must have been situated near Ḥadhatta
below the Upper Zâb in Adiabene.
5 A disciple of Ķâm-Isho' who flourished about the year 630.
For his works see B. O., iii. 1, p. 187.
6 Sabhr-Isho' Rôsţâm was a native of the village of Herêm
in Adiabene, and entered the great convent on Mount Ìzlâ
under the Abbot Narsai, the successor of Bâbhai. In addition
<pb n="109"/>
cerning these holy men, it seemeth to me superfluous
that I also should speak about them; and in asking a
prayer of those who read the accounts of their noble
deeds and contest, I pass on from them.
CHAPTER XXXIII.'
OF RABBAN SARGÎS (SERGIUS) WHO WAS SURNAMED
"DESTROYER OF THE MIGHTY".
Now this Sergius, worthy of all blessedness, came
from the country of Beth Garmai; he was instructed
in doctrine in various schools, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="61"/> but more especially
in that of Beth Râsthak, a village in the country of
Margå, at the time when Rabban Ķâm-Åshö, a native
of Beth Garmai,³ from the village of Hashâ,' was an
expositor there. Now when the blessed Mar Ķâm-
Isho went down to Mâḥôzė, he died there. And
this Sergius was a disciple of the holy Mâr Jacob, and
he departed while' Rabban was alive, [and went] and
dwelt in Nêrbhâ dhe Beth Gazzâ, in the cells which
to the lives of Joseph and Abraham he wrote those of Abbâ
Abraham of Bêth 'Abhê, Abbâ Ķâm-isho' of Bêth 'Â bhê,
Abraham of Nethpar, and some others. See Wright, Syr. Lit.,
p. 843; B. O., iii. I, p. 455.
This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, pp. 440, 472. Sergius
flourished at the beginning of the seventh century.
2 A place situated in the diocese of Margâ. See B. O., iii. 1,
pp. 178, 440; Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 97.
جرمقانی خد مشهد
.ܒܝܬ ܓܪ̈ܡܝ man of
* It was situated on the Lower Zab.
5 See pp. 119, 147.
7 Read
6 Seleucia and Ctesiphon.
8 A mountainous district in Bêth Zabhdai.
o wlto.
<pb n="110"/>were called Bêth 'Ainâthâ. And at the entreaty of
Rabban Jacob, the blessed Sergius composed a history
of the noble deeds and praiseworthy acts of the holy
men who had lived in the country of Bêth Garmai,
and this book which he composed is to be found every-
where, and the histories contained in it make the reader
marvel, and excite praises of God in him. And he
called his book the "Destroyer of the Mighty"-now he
called it thus because he did not write about the great
men who were in the Church, but rather concerning
those who triumphed in the houses of their fathers,
and in the church' of their native villages, in simpli-
city of mien and despising of self,-and from the name
of his book he himself was called, "Destroyer of the
Mighty". The holy Mår Åshö-yahbh, and Rabban Ķâm-
Isho were also disciples of his, but I shall not speak
here concerning them because they have histories
which are set down in their proper places, together
with those of their brethren, further on, and because
the record of them, together with the necessary parti-
culars [of their lives], would require that I should be able
to speak without stint.
CHAPTER XXXIV.2
OF SAHDONA, AND OF THE WORKS WHICH HE COMPOSED.
Now this Sâhdônâ, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="62"/> according to what we
learn from the history of him by Rabban Bar-'Idtâ,
? ܘܒܥܕܬܐ Read ܃
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. I, p. 453, col. 2.
3 Sâhdônâ, i. e., the "little martyr", was ordained Bishop of
Maḥôzê dhe Arîwân in Bêth Garmai by Isho'-yahbh of Gedhàlà.
<pb n="111"/>
came from Halmón' a village of Beth Nûhâdhra. And
after having been fully trained at Nisibis in the teaching
of Divine Books, and being wise and learned in them,
he took upon himself the garb of the ascetic life at
the hands of Rabban Jacob in this monastery. And
he zealously attached himself to the things which con-
duce to a divine manner of life, that is to say, to ab-
stinence, and fasting, and watching, and prayer, under
the guidance of Rabban [Jacob]. And it is well known
also that he felt the sweetness of the holy life, which
is grafted on to spiritual conviction, from the reflections
which he made in his works upon the venerable ascetic
life. Now he wrote two volumes on the various exer-
cises of the monastic life, and a book of "Consolations"
is also attributed to him, and other works on various
He was one of the members of the Mission sent to Heraclius
A. D. 628, and on his way back became a convert to Jacobite
views, a fact which caused great scandal in the Nestorian Church.
The text of the letters which Ìsho'-yahbh wrote concerning this
matter are given at the end of Bk. ii, chap. 6, in which
Thomas of Margà relates the story. See B. O., iii. 1, pp. 81,
107, 115, 142, 453, 457, 462; Wright, Syr. Lit., p. 842.
• Halmôn, or Halamûn, (the Halamoon of Badger, Nestor-
ians, vol. 1, p. 394) was situated in the north of Bêth Nûhâdhrâ,
or Bêth Nûhâdhrê, on the left bank of the Upper Ḥâbûr.
The Region of باهرا بانهذرا با نهد را با نهود را چه به امجد 2
Nohodarê" was a district or Nestorian Church province, the
southerly limit of which was Awânâ near Bâlâdh on the Tigris
opposite Eski Môşul; the boundary on the north-west was the
Monastery of Rabban Aphni-Maran dhe Khurkmâ, or Dêr az-
Za'farân, not far from al-Gezîra by Gebel Gudi; and the most
northerly point was Halmôn. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 208-
216, and the authorities quoted by him.
<pb n="112"/>matters. He also composed a history of Rabban [Jacob],
and of the triumphs of the ascetics who lived in the
country of the East. He wrote the funeral oration for
the burial of Rabban Jacob which begins, "My brethren,
a mighty chief has fallen amongst us this day by the
hand of death", from which, every one who readeth
it will perceive the high character of his intellect, and
the power of his language, and he will find that he
was a mighty man among those who compose books.
He did not continue to write to the end, for he went
out of his mind; but how his understanding was
destroyed I will relate afterwards in the place where
his history requireth it to be written.
CHAPTER XXXV."
OF THE MURDER OF KING KHUSRAU.
Now when Khusrau, the son of Hormizd, having
exceeded all bounds in his mad greediness for acquiring
money, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="63"/> had grown grey in all wickedness and
* The greater part of this chapter is quoted in B. O., iii, 1,
p. 91, coll. 1. 2.
2 This statement of Thomas of Margà is supported by
historical evidence. In the eighteenth year of his reign
Khusrau "liess die Einkünfte aus den Steuern seiner
Länder sowie allen sonstigen Einnahmequellen zählen, und da
berichtete man ihm, dass seine Einkünfte aus der Grundsteuer
und den andern Quellen sich in diesem Jahr in gemünztem
Gelde auf 420 Millionen Mithqȧl an Gewicht beliefen, was,
10 Dirham auf 7 Mithqâl gerechnet, 600 Millionen Dirham
macht" (about 294,000,000 marks or 360,000,000 francs). All
this money was brought into the treasury at Ctesiphon, where
<pb n="113"/>
became old, the blessed Mâr Yazdin,' the head of the
believers, died, who had crowned himself with earthly
greatness and heavenly glory, and it was for him to
inherit and enjoy the paradise of heavenly joy. And
Khusrau forgot all the good deeds of Mår Yazdin, and
seized all his wealth and possessions, and he dismissed
Shamtâ and Kurtâ, his truly believing sons, worthy
of blessing, and from being rich, they became poor,
and from being men of rank, they became of no account.
Now when the blessed Shamţâ' saw that the wicked-
ness of Khusrau the foolish king increased and was
added unto as he became older, he rose up secretly,
and went down to Maḥôzê, the royal cities, 3 and he
slew with the sword the twenty-four sons of Khusrau
there were already stored up 48,000,000 Mithqâl of money
coined by Pêrôz, son of Yazdegerd, and by Kawâdh, son of
Pêrôz. "Dazu kam noch eine Menge von Juwelen, Kleidern, u. s. w.,
deren Betrag nur Gott zählen kann." Nöldeke, Geschichte der
Perser, pp. 353ff.
Yazdin was the director of the land-tax of the whole
kingdom and had amassed an enormous fortune, which the
king confiscated. See Nöldeke, Geschichte der Perser, p. 583,
note 1; Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 115-121; Wright, Syr. Lit.,
p. 837.
2 Shamţâ here appears as the leader of the rebellion. See
Nöldeke, op. cit., p. 354, note 4; Guidi, Nuovo testo, p. 23.
3 I. c., Ctesiphon and Seleucia.
* The number of Khusrau's sons is given as seventeen by
Tabari. When the nobles heard that Khusrau had given orders
to slay all the prisoners in the gaols, certain of them came to
'Akr Bâbil (which Nöldeke identifies with al-Ķaṣr, where Khus-
rau's sons were being educated, a body of soldiers being
stationed near to prevent their leaving the place), and taking
Shêrôë they brought him by night to Beh-Ardashîr where he
was proclaimed "King of Kings." Nöldeke, op. cit., pp. 357 & 382.
Р
<pb n="114"/>who were being educated there. And he took Shêrôë,
that is Ķewâdh, Khusrau's son from among them, and
he came to their palace, and opened the prison, and
brought out all that were therein, and he mounted
them upon horses, and he armed them with implements
of war, and he made Shêrôë king without the wish
and command of his father. Now because³ of his
avarice and greediness, * Khusrau had disbanded his
troops and sent them away, and the blessed Shamţâ
went in to the palace of Khusrau with his servants,
and slew him with the sword;' and there was rest for
the churches in all quarters, and by the command of
Khusrau had intended that Merdânshâh, the son of Shîrîn
should succeed him. See Theophanes, Chronographia, ed. Nie-
buhr vol. 1, pp. 499-501. Merdanshah was slain with the other
sons of Khusrau.
2 "Chosrau verachtete die Menschen und schätzte gering,
was kein verständiger und umsichtiger König geringschätzt.
Sein frevler Muth und seine Rücksichtslosigkeit gegen Gott
ging so weit, dass er dem Befehlshaber der inneren Leibwache
Namens Zadhân-Ferruch gebot, alle Gefangene in seinen Kerkern
umzubringen; ihre Zahl belief sich auf 36,000 Mann". Nöldeke,
op. cit., p. 356. The first act of Shêrôë when brought to Beh-
Ardashîr was to release all these prisoners, who at once joined
with the nobles in proclaiming him king.
.ܘܡܛܠ Read 3
.is a rare word ܓܓܪܢܘܬܐ ܘܓܓܪܢܘܬܗ Read 4
5 According to Tabarî Khusrau had determined to slay all
the troops which had fled from before the victorious arms of
Heraclius. Nöldeke, op. cit., p. 356. 6 Read.
7 According to Ţabarî Khusrau fled to one of his gardens
called Bâgh-i-Hinduwân whither he was pursued and captured;
he was afterwards cast into prison, where seventeen or eighteen
of his sons were slain before his face, and where he died or
was murdered. According to Guidi, (Nuovo testo, p. 24)
ܬܒܥܘ
<pb n="115"/>
Shamţȧ the troops of Shêrôë' proclaimed a good hope
for men.
And Shêrôë commanded the Christians to appoint
a Catholicus, and Mår Isho-yahbh, Bishop of Bâlâdh,
who was called the man of Gědhâlâ, from Gědhálå³
a village of Beth 'Arbhayê, was appointed. Now
200 .05002 wowalls? 02000
200 moramas? The Avax 320 2001
wx No Probooks Ax
words als pood was
ax Nowel 200.0020
ܢܝܗܘܪܡܝܙܕ ܒܢܪܓܐ ܥܠ ܟܬܦܗ. ܘܬܬܐ ܥܠ ܐܚܪܬܐ. ܘܐܪܩܕ ܥܠܘܗ. ܫܝܪܘܝ ܒܪܗ.
For the history of the overthrow of this ܘܩܒܪܘܗܝ ܒܩܒܪܐ ܕܡܠܟ̈ܐ.
king see Nöldeke, op. cit., p. 357, note 4, p. 383, note 3; Gibbon,
Decline and Fall, chap. 46; Chron. Paschal, tom. 1, p. 728, ed.
Dindorf; Theophanes, Chronographia, p. 501; and Eutychius,
Annales, ii, p. 251 ff.
⚫ Shamţȧ suffered imprisonment and the loss of his right
hand by the order of Shêrôë, and he was shortly after crucified
before the door of the Church of Beth Narkós. See Guidi,
Nuovo testo, pp. 24.25.
⚫ Shêrôe's reign lasted eight months.
I. e., Gudal, Jl, near Mosul.
+ Beth 'Arbhayê is described by Bar-Saróshwai as the district
which extends from Bâlâdh, opposite Eski-Mosul on the Tigrist
to Nisibis. In a passage quoted by Wright (Catalogue Syr.
MSS., p. 1136, col. 2) it is said that marauding bands of the
Persians were perpetually coming over their borders and captur-
ing cities from Ras-'Ain to Nisibis, and from the countries of
Maiperkât and Arzan to the mountains of Ķardô; they captured
also Ţur 'Abdîn which is in these countries. To prevent these
raids two fortresses were built; one on the borders of Bêth
'Arbhayê, by the mountains, and the other on the Tigris.
probably Beapßaes of Theophylact, and
of
Yakút, which is described as being near Môşul. See also the
passages quoted by Hoffmann, Auszuge, note 170, p. 23; and
B. O., . 2, p. 507- See Guidi, Nuovo testo, p. 24, 1. 17.
<pb n="116"/>when a synod had been assembled, all the fathers
entreated the holy Mâr Bâbhai to be Catholicus; but
he would not accept the office at all, for he preferred
to end his days in his cell in the monastery to be-
coming head of the monastery by strife. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="64"/> And
the Catholicus and some of the Bishops accompanied him
in honour to his monastery, and when they had parted
in peace, and had gone away to a distance, suddenly
the holy angel of God appeared to Mår Båbhai in the
form of a horseman holding a fiery sword, mount-
ed on a white horse. And he stood in the space
before his cell and spake with him, and said, "Since
now thou hast excused thyself from the office of
Patriarch, and another standeth therein, grant me per-
mission to follow him." Mâr Bâbhai said to him.
"Who art thou, master?" The angel said to him, "I am an
angel commanded by God, the Lord of all, to minister
unto the patriarchal throne of the East. As long as
thou wast the vicar of the Catholicus, from the first
day even until now, I never departed from thy side;
but now it is necessary for me to cleave to him that
hath received this office." Rabban said to him, "If I
had known that thou wast with me, I would,
with all care, have accepted this great work; but now
depart in peace, and pray for me;" and the holy angel
was hidden from Rabban's sight. May the prayers of
Mâr Bâbhai, and of all his companions be a high wall
to the holy Church, and to her children, Amen! And
here I bring this book to a close in order that its end
may be sanctified by the memory of the holy Mâr Bâbhai.
Here endeth the First Book.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="65"/>
<pb n="117"/>
Now as the beginning of everything which existeth
is poor and weak in comparison with the end thereof,
which is built up little by little,-even as a child is
first of all trained in simple things, and little by little
he acquireth growth and increase of power and stature,
and as when the command was given to Adam, that
he should not eat of the fruit,' the world continued
for a long time in a state of childhood without progress*
to manhood, for the gift of the Law by the hands of
the blessed Moses' was more excellent than that which
was given to Adam, for the latter was written upon
the tables of the heart with the knowledge of nature,
but the former was added with ink, after the manner
of books, and also the perfection which is according
to the wisdom which is in Christ, the Lord of our
life, and which surpasseth all ancient laws and command-
ments, was given in after times according to the measure
of the perfect Man-so also was it in respect of the
Genesis iii. 3.
3 Exodus xx.
xx, from ✓ ✓✓, a rare word.
4 literally "by writing." There seems to be no
example of this word in Payne Smith's Thesaurus.
<pb n="118"/>[ascetic life of the] divine man Mâr Jacob; in the
beginning it acquired through him beauty, through the
perfect sons and glorious heirs of his manner of life,
but at the end it was crowned with glorious increase
and growth. So also in the matter of the kingdom
of the wise man Solomon, although it gained more
might and glory than the kingdom of the blessed David,
yet the kingdom of David received no disparage-
ment, inasmuch as that of Solomon was established
by the prayers of David, and by the promises made
to him; so also although the congregation increased,
and the Monastery of Rabban Jacob became more
glorious under the dispensation of his children than it
was during his own life time, this fact did not induce
any diminution of his holiness which had existed before,
but made it <pb type="textAllignment"  n="66"/> rather the more glorious, for the growth
and prosperity of disciples give joy to diligent teachers.
So also the double portion of the spirit which the
blessed Elisha received more than his master, did not
bring upon the marvellous Elijah any loss of greatness,
but rather made manifest his glory, when he said,
"Thou hast asked a great deal, nevertheless what
thou hast asked shall be to thee."³ Thus the glory
which came upon this holy monastery under the holy
Mâr Isho-yahbh, and the blessed Rabban Ķâm-Isho
increased the glory of their spiritual father. Now in
their days the number of the monks in this holy
assembly amounted to three hundred men. When the
blessed John the Elder-now Rabban Jacob had com-
manded that he should be the head of the monastery after
I ✓ Bo, a rare word.
32 Kings ii. 9,10.
.ܒܝܟܝܬ ܠܬܡܞܐ Read -
+ Read.
him
<pb n="119"/>
went forth and fled, Abbâ Paul received the
office of head; and after him Rabban Ķâm-isho was
the head for many years.
.
CHAPTER II.
OF RABBAN JACOB OF BETH NÛHADHRA. ³
Rabban Jacob who became head of the Monastery
of Beth Rabban Åsho-yahbh, was a disciple of Rabban
Ķâm-Isho, and he came from Rêshâ, a province in
the country of Beth Garmai. He laboured in the
schools of Harbath Gelâl, where he was thoroughly
trained, and from his youth up he was a disciple in
this Monastery [of Beth 'Abhê], while Rabban Ķâm-
Isho was head. He was a spiritual man and a teacher,
and he excelled in the ascetic life more than all his
contemporaries. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="67"/> He was a seer of things which
were remote, and of things which were about to happen,
and he was called by his contemporaries, "Jacob the
Seer."
Now when the blessed Mår Îsho-yahbh had built the
temple in this Monastery of [Beth Abhé], he gathered
together Metropolitans and Bishops to the consecration
thereof by the office of the Holy Mysteries, wishing
.ܘܒܬܪܗ ܗܢܐ Read ܃
ܒܝܬ ܓܪ̈ܡܝ Read 3
2 See B. O., iii. 1, pp. 118,141,255.
4 See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 277.
5 Harbath Gelâl or Gellâl, was probably situated
on the Lower Zâb. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 261; B. O.,
iii. ii, p. 756.
I. c., Isho'-yahbh III. of Adiabene.
<pb n="120"/>with pride to show forth the greatness of his monastery
in the sight of all those who were assembled. And
it came to pass that at that moment the blessed Jacob
was in the refectory, and [Mâr Isho-yahbh] sent and
called him, and commanded him to go up to the
pulpit and read the psalms. Now there was present
with Mar Catholicus a great doctor who had gone out
to the porch of the temple to meditate upon the heads
of the subject which he wished to treat in a learned
manner in [his] exposition of the Gospel. And when
the divine man Jacob had begun to sing the psalm,
the sweetness of his voice so greatly attracted the
attention and mind of every one, that the eyes of all
were fixed upon him and were looking at him. And
when he had finished his psalm and had come down
[from the pulpit], the doctor cried out with a loud
voice, saying. "Fie upon thee, young man, for the
sweetness of thy voice and the beautiful manner of
thy singing have driven out of my mind all the thoughts
which I wished to gather together"; and as the time
had come Rabban Jacob went out to his cell.
Now God, who foreseeth what is for the benefit of
the community, in that the blessed Rabban Mår Îsho-
yahbh, the monk, and head of the monastery was
dead, and the brethren of his monastery being troubled
by reason of the absence of a man at their head,-
now Rabban İshô-yahbh at the hour of his death had
.ܓܪܕܐ read ܢܪܕܐ For .ܡܠܢܐܝܬ
* Rabban Îsho'-yahbh, the founder of the Monastery which
bore this name at Môşul, flourished about A. D. 570, while
Ezekiel was Patriarch of the Nestorians. He was surnamed
masis, or boa. For a list of his writings see
B. O., . 1, pp. 230, 231.
<pb n="121"/>
himself said to them, "Be not afflicted, my sons and
brethren, at my separation from you, for behold our
Lord will move the blessed Jacob, a monk of Bêth
'Abhê, and he will come to you, and will be a head
to you"-stirred up against him foolish jealousy by the
hand of certain men, such as was stirred up against
the blessed Jacob his [spiritual] father in the Great
Monastery [of Izlå], and he went forth secretly and
departed to that holy monastery.
And the sons of
this monastery were greatly vexed and afflicted on his
account, and wished to make him come back here. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="68"/>
And they went down to Mar Ḥenân-Îsho" several
times, and they brought against him letters [threatening]
excommunication, but he would not at all be persuaded
to return. Let every one who wishes to learn of his
greatness and of the great freedom of speech which
he possessed with God, take his history and read it;
and from its perusal he will be moved to the praise
of God, Who so greatly exalteth and magnifieth His
saints, and to Whom be glory for ever and ever!
CHAPTER III..
OF RABBAN APHNI-MARAN. ³
This Aphni-Mâran was a disciple of Rabban Ķâm-
Isho, and also of Rabban Aphnî-Mâran of holy memory,
* See supra, p. 72, note 4.
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 187, coll. 1, 2.
3 He flourished about A. D. 660 under George the Patriarch,
and is said to have been the founder of the Dêr al-Za'farân
near Môşul. See B. O., ii, p. 422; iii. 1, p 187. He is one
१
<pb n="122"/>and he came from Karkhâ dhě Bêth Sělôkh' which is
in the country of Bêth Garmai. From his youth up
he was a son and heir of the holy fathers in this mon-
astery, serving perfectly the life of excellence, and being
guided to the kingdom of heaven and its happiness
by the hands and mediation of Rabban Ķâm-lsho,
whose own peculiar disciple he was.
And God gave
him wisdom and understanding in the Scriptures, and
like a spiritual philosopher, he composed many works
and "Responses", and treatises on doctrine in a perfect
manner, and rivers of living water flowed from his
belly according to the word of our Lord. And against
this man, because he was also like unto the pillar of
light which led the Hebrews,³ and because God wished
him to be the founder of a monastery with a large
brotherhood, like his [spiritual] father, envious people
were stirred up, and they placed him on a bier for
the dead, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="69"/> and [ascribing to him] the name of
Meşǎlleyânâ, with psalms and prayers for the dead
they brought him out to the place where they make
asses run. Nevertheless by his hands also the Lord
of the monks mentioned by name in the letter which Ìsho'-
yahbh sent to Bêth 'Abhê concerning the election of a head.
See p. 104, 1. II.
4
¹ I. e., Kerkûk, 500, J.S.S. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 267.
St. John vii. 38.
3 Exodus xiii. 21.
literally, "and in the name of Meșallianism."
For the doctrines of the see supra, p. 91, note 3.
5 The monks who treated Aphnî Mâran in this manner
wished to indicate that he was an ass, and was only fit to be
buried like an, ass.
<pb n="123"/>
built and finished the holy monastery which is to this
day called by his name and memorial;" may his prayers
be with us for good, Amen!
CHAPTER IV.
OF THE DEPARTURE OF MAR ÎSHO-YAHBH, [THE CATHOLICUS]
AND OF THE BISHOPS WHO WERE WITH HIM TO BETH
RHOMÂYE³ (ASIA MINOR).
Now when sho-yahbh' of Gëdhâlâ had become
Catholicus, after the death of their Bishop, the believ-
ing men who were in Nineveh chose as governor
and head of the pasture of their city and of all their
* The Monastery of Rabban Aphnî-Mâran marked the limit
on the north-west of the church province of Bêth Nûhâdhrâ
(see supra, p. III, note 2). It is placed by Yâķût not far from al-
Gezîra by or upon Gebel Gûdî. According to Ibn al-Athîr Dêr
al-Za'farân or Kalat al-Za'farân stood upon a high mountain,
near or Pêrôzshâbhôr, which lay on the banks of the
Tigris. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 213. Sachau mentions
(Reise in Syrien und Mesopotamien, p. 376) "Ķalat Za'farân,
eine Ruine, 2 Stunden entfernt, auf dem Westufer des Tigris
auf einem Hügel gelegen."
2 This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, pp. 105, col. 2, and
475, col. 2.
3 Literally the "country of the Romans;" but Constantinople
was nova Roma, 'Pwμn véa, and hence the Syrians and Arabs
use the words and JI, ar-Rum, to designate the By-
zantine Greeks. Wright, Chronicle of Joshua the Stylite, p. 1.
I. e., sho'-yahbh II. He sat from A. D. 628-644, and
was Bishop of Bâlâdh at the time of his elevation to the
patriarchate. See B. O., ii, pp. 416-418; iii. 1, pp. 105,475;.
Bar-Hebræus, Chron. Eccles., ii. 113, note 1; and Baethgen,
Fragmente, pp. 13,19,108,111. Isho'-yahbh II died A. Gr. 955-
A. D. 643 and was buried at Kerkûk; see Bar-Hebræus, Chron.
Eccles., 127, note 3; and Wright, Syr. Lit., p. 842. The
<pb n="124"/>country, the blessed Mår Åshö-yahbh,' the disciple of
Rabban, and the son of the good and honourable man
of worthy memory, Bastôhmagh, the nobleman from
Kuphlânâ, a city of Adiabene. And the people of
Mâḥôzê dhe Ariwân (or Ariavân),³ a city of Beth
Garmai, chose Sâhdônâ, the disciple of Rabban (Jacob].
concerning whom we have written a short time ago.
And when Shêrôë rose in the kingdom, he desired
and wished to live in his kingdom in peace, and to
be remote from the disturbances, and strifes, and raids,
and evil things which Khusrau his father had committed;
and by the command and permission of his pacific
majesty there was rest to all the churches that were
under the dominion of the Persians.* And [when] Mar
Isho-yahbh from Bêth Arbhâyês was appointed Patriarch,
King Shêrôë persuaded the Catholicus to select from
principal writings of lsho'-yahbh were a commentary on the
Psalms, and sundry epistles, histories, and homilies. According
to Guidi, (Nuovo testo, p. 24) he was a married man.
* He was educated in the schools of Nisibis, and became
Bishop of Môşul, and afterwards Metropolitan of Arbèl and
Môşul. He sat as Catholicus from A. D. 647-658. The chief
events in his life are recorded by Thomas of Margå in the
following chapters.
* All the MSS. here read 200, which is certainly a mistake
for . See Syriac text p. 78, 1. 5.
3 Read. See B. O., iii. 1, pp. 116,475; iii. ii,
pp. 723,761; Bar-Hebræus, Chron. Eccles., 18, note 1; Hoff-
mann, Auszüge, p. 52, note 443, p. 277, note 2180. This town
was probably situated on the Lesser Zâb.
See Guidi, Nuovo testo, p. 24
aman from the people who dwelt in عربي خخ or خدشه
443 Jol, i. e., the district between Eski Môşul on
the Tigris and Nisibis.
<pb n="125"/>
the dominion of the East certain Metropolitans and
Bishops, that they might go up to the territory of the
Byzantine Greeks, at the cost and expense of the
[Persian] king, bearing his letters and greetings, saying,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="70"/> "Let them make to pass away and to be blotted
out all the discord' and enmity which have existed
between the Persians and the Greeks, and by their
wisdom let them sow peace in the two countries."
Then Mår Isho-yahbh being obedient to the command
of the good King Shêrôë, gathered together Mår
I
Ax, literally, "the troubling of peace."
2 The Persian Mission of peace was despatched by Bôrân,
daughter of Khusrau Parwêz, although overtures of peace had
been made to Heraclius by Shêrôë. Bôrân reigned only one
year and four months, but during this short period she endeav-
oured to do away with some of the ill effects of the recent wars.
"Wie man erzählt, sprach sie am Tage ihrer Thronbesteigung:
'frommer Handlungsweise will ich mich befleissen und Gerechtig-
keit anbefehlen.'
Sie behandelte ihre Unterthanen gut,
verbreitete Gerechtigkeit über sie, liess Münzen prägen und
steinerne und hölzerne Brücken ausbessern. Die Steuerrück-
stände erliess sie den Leuten und schrieb an sie insgemein offne
Briefe, worin sie ihnen darlegte, wie sie ihnen wohlthun wolle,
und die verstorbenen Glieder der Dynastie schilderte.
Sie gab dem römischen Kaiser durch Vermittlung des Catho-
licus Isho-yahbh das hölzerne Kreuz zurück." Nöldeke, Ge-
schichte der Perser, pp. 390-392.
ܘܐܡܠܟܘ ܥܠܝܗܘܢ ܦܪ̈ܣܝܐ ܠܒܪܘܐܢ
ܝܢܬܬܗ ܕܫܝܪܘܝ. ܗܕܐ ܕܝܢ ܟܕ ܐܡܠܟܬ݂: ܒܚܟܡܬܐ ܫܕܪܬ ܠܘܬ ܗܪܩܠܝܐ܆ ܠܡܪܝ ܝܫܘܥܝܗܒ
ܩܬܘܠܝܩܐ܆ ܢܝܟ ܕܢܥܒܕ ܠܞ ܥܡ ܫܠܟܐ. ܟܕ ܐܬܠܘܝ ܠܗ ܩܘܪܝܩܘܣ ܕܢܨܝܒܝܢ. ܘܓܒܪܝܠ
ܕܟܪܟܐ ܕܒܝܬ ܓܪ̈ܡܝ. ܘܡܪܘܬܐ ܕܓܘܣܛܪܐ. ܘܣܓܝ ܚܕܝܐܝܬ ܐܬܩܒܠܘ ܡܢ ܡܠܟܐ
ܗܪܩܠܐ ܘܥܒܕ ܠܘܬܗܘܢ ܟܠ ܕܨܒܘ. ܒܪܘܐܢ ܐܢܬܬ ܫܝܪܘܝ ܕܐܡܠܟܬܼ ܥܠ ܢܪ̈ܣܚܐ:
Guidi, Nuovo testo, p. 26. Îsho'-yahbh
met Heraclius at Aleppo, but he can hardly have given back to
him the Holy Cross, which the Persians had carried off when
they conquered Jerusalem A. D. 614 (Gibbon, Decline and Fall,
<pb n="126"/>Cyriacus, the Metropolitan Bishop of Nisibis,' and Mar
Paul, Metropolitan of Adiabene, and Mâr Gabriel³ of
Karkhâ dhě Bêth Sělôkh (Kerkûk) and certain other
Bishops, who were wise, instructed and understanding
chap. xlvi), for that had been restored by Ardashîr III in 628-
629, and the festival to celebrate its restoration took place at
Jerusalem in 629. (One writer says that is, the general of
Ardashîr, sent the Cross back to Heraclius; see Guidi, Nuovo
testo, p. 25.) See the discussion on this point in Nöldeke, op..
cit., p. 392, note 1. In the account of this mission given by
Bar-Hebræus (Chron. Eccles., ii. 113) Isho'-yahbh is said to have
given the Greeks to understand that his religion was the same
Isho'-yahbh .ܘܟܕ ܐܫܬܐܠ ܡܛܠ ܬܘܕܝܬܐ ܚܘܝ ܕܐܝܟ ܝܘܢܰܝܐ ܡܘܕܐ .as theirs
was far-sighted enough to make an alliance with Muḥammad
the Prophet (or, as Wright thought, with Abu Bakr) through
the intervention of a Christian governor at Najrân called
Sayyed, and sho', the Bishop of the believers at that place.
Certain of the conditions of the agreement, which was ratified
by 'Omar ibn al-Khaṭṭâb, are given by Bar-Hebræus Chron.
Eccles., ii, col. 117; see also B. O., ii, p. 418; iii. 1, p. 108.
col. I. Isho'-yahbh stipulated that the Christians should be
protected from the attacks of their foes; that the Arabs should
not compel them to go out to war with them; that they should
not compel them to change their manners and laws; that they
should help them to repair their old churches; that the tax on the
poor should not exceed four zuzê, and that the tax on merchants
and the wealthy should be ten zûzê per man; that a Christian
woman in Arab service should neither be compelled to give
up her faith, nor to neglect fasting and prayer; etc.
See supra, Bk. i, chap. 27, p. 91. For the letters of Isho'-
yahbh to this bishop, see B. O., iii. 1, p. 141, col. 2, p. 142,
col. I. After his death his cell was spoiled by orders of the
governor of Nisibis; see Guidi, Nuovo testo, p. 26, at the foot.
See B. O., iii. 1, p. 116.
3 See B. O., iii. I, pp. 141,142; where letters from Îsho.
yahbh to this bishop concerning the people of Tagrîth (Tekrît)
are described.
<pb n="127"/>
men, and with them were also our holy Ishő-yahbh
of Nineveh, and Sâhdônå. And thus through Christ
our Lord, the Lord of the worlds and the Gover-
nor and Guardian of the two countries and of the
whole world gave these shepherds mercy in the sight
of the Greeks, and they received their assembly and
their petition as if they had been the angels of God.
Thus those holy men were rewarded for all the care
and heavy toil of that long journey, and they returned
in peace to this country, each man to his episcopal
throne.
CHAPTER V.'
OF THE CASKET OF THE BONES OF THE APOSTLES WHICH
MAR ISHO YAHBH BROUGHT WITH HIM [FROM ANTIOCH],
AND PLACED IN THIS MONASTERY.
Now while these holy men who have been men-
tioned above were passing through the city of Antioch,
and while they were resting in one of the churches
of this city in which they tarried many days, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="71"/>
Már Isho-yahbh of Beth 'Abhe saw a white marble
casket upon which was the sign of the adorable Cross,
and to this, united to the chariot of its honour, were
two figures of cherubs. And he saw the mighty deeds
which were wrought there by means of it, and he
learned that there were inside it some of the bones
and portions of the bodies of the blessed Apostles,*
and being hot with all the desire of his love for that
casket in which these were laid, he offered up prayers
to God, the Lord of all, and frequent entreaties, that
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 1c6, col 2.
2 St. Matthew died and was buried in Antioch. See Acta
Sanctorum, xlviii, Sept. 21; Lipsius, Apostelgeschichte, vol. 2,
p. 127; Budge, Book of the Bec, p. 106.
<pb n="128"/>by means of himself it might be brought to this country.
And having vexed and tortured himself [by scheming]
all manner of devices, and not knowing what to do,
he gave this matter to God, [asking] that while he,
that is Mâr Isho-yahbh, used all human efforts, Christ
would protect and defend him in a Divine manner.³
And this actually happened, for he stole it and brought
it. with him here with all the honour due to the holy
pearls which were therein. And we are certain in our
opinion and judgment that this matter was wrought³
thus, for it is spoken of to this day in the city of
Antioch, even as also it came down by tradition, and
was handed on to us by those men who were before
us in this monastery.
CHAPTER VI.4
OF HOW SAHDONA [FOOLISHLY] TURNED ASIDE FROM THE
TRUE AND ORTHODOX BELIEF.
Now when those holy men who went to the terri-
tory of the Greeks (Asia Minor) were in the land of
Apamea, they tarried there a few days to rest them-
2
B. O. has
.
• Literally, While he, Mâr Isho'-yahbh worked like a man
(A), Christ would protect and defend him like a God ().
ܐܣܞܥܪܬ Read 3
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. I, p. 107, coll. 1, 2.
5 The modern Ķalat el-Medik on the Orontes. Apamea
lies on the western edge of the plain which extends from the
southern slope of the el-Bâra mountains, and the mountains
near Kalat Sêdjar and Hâmâ. See Sachau, Reise in Meso-
potamien, p. 71 f. Dr. Strassmaier has noted a passage on
British Museum tablet SP. 1. 176, in which it is said that the
city of A-pa-am-a is situated upon the river Și-il-hu.
<pb n="129"/>
selves; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="72"/> and there was there a certain monastery of
heretics' who had made themselves strangers to the
religion of truth. And the holy and blessed Mår John,
Bishop of the Scattered of the country³ of Damascus,
a great and godlike man who worked signs and
wonders like the Apostles in those countries, and
I whose acts of abstinence and ascetic manner of life and
exalted holiness are reported unto this day, and Mår
Isho-yahbh of our convent, and Sâhdônâ with him,
wished to go to these men to hold a discussion with
them. And when the sons of that monastery went
forth to them, they marvelled and were astonished at
the arguments which these three brilliant stars brought
against them, and they perceived that the stubble of
their doctrine was not able [to resist] in the very smallest
degree, the fire of the true wisdom and the powerful
demonstrations of the men from the East. Now the
men of that monastery had a head, a grey-headed old
man, and his disciples went into his presence and said
to him, "Three Eastern Bishops from among the
ambassadors of the King of the Persians, who have
come to us, have destroyed and made of none effect
all the labour and care' [which we have spent] in
weaving compositions of words on the dogma which
we hold." Now that wicked old man who, according
to what I have learned from others by the tradition
which hath come down, was a sorcerer, commanded6
his disciples to entreat them to come in to see him,
for [he wished] more particularly to hear from them
* Not necessarily Jacobites.
2 Literally, "confession."
.ܕܟܪܐ Read 3 .ܘܬܚܟ̈ܝܬܗܘܢ Strike out the point after ܀
5 Read µeλétn.
6 Reads.
I
<pb n="130"/>concerning the petition which they had moved. And when
the blessed men Mâr Åshöʻ-yahbh and Mâr John excused
themselves, for they accounted the sight of that wicked
old man as the sight of the Devil himself, Sâhdônâ,
as it were relying upon his own enlightened under-
standing was so bold as to go in; and when his com-
panions entreated him not to cross [the threshold] he
would not be persuaded by them. And they say that
when he had gone in to the monastery to the old
man, and had seen his grey hairs and age, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="73"/> he bowed
his head under his right hand; and thus, they say, the
understanding of Sâhdônâ became corrupted from the
true faith which he held. And little by little, with the
progress of time and changes, Sâhdônâ wrote books for
those who denied the correctness of the opinion that
there are two natures and two persons in one created
form. And when the holy Mâr Isho-yahbh of Adiabene
arose as Catholicus, he expelled Sâhdônâ from the
Church, according to the prophecy which had been
[made] concerning him by the holy Rabban Bar-Idtå
the ascetic in very truth.
ܚܒܪܘܗܝ Read -
.ܣܝܡܐ ܕܡܫܟܟܝ Read -
3 Among the letters of Mâr Isho'-yahbh are five which
relate to Sâhdônâ and to his conversion to the views held by the
Jacobites, and they form Nos 6,7,28,29 and 30 of those which
were written while he was Metropolitan of Ḥazzâ (Arbêl) near
Môşul. Portions of them have been published by Assemânî,
B. O., ii. 1, pp. 116,118 and 119, but as the defection of
Sâhdônâ caused such a disturbance in the Nestorian Church,
and was held to be of a very serious character by Mår İshô'-
yahbh himself, and as the letters are of such importance for the
right understanding of certain parts of the history of Thomas
<pb n="131"/>
CHAPTER VII.'
OF MAR ISHO-YAHBH [iii]. THE CATHOLICUS, AND OF HOW HE
WISHED TO ESTABLISH A SCHOOL IN THIS MONASTERY.
Now as soon as Mâr Isho-yahbh had become
Catholicus and Patriarch, and had received all the
fulness of the holy things, and the sacerdotal garments
which are given for the glory and advancement and
perfection of the holy Church, by the election of the
Holy Spirit, the cause, and giver, and perfector of all
her sublimity, he showed forth diligent zeal and care
with all the solicitude which it is right should be mani-
fested by sons for the paternal inheritance of the house
in which they were reared. And he built in this mon-
astery a splendid temple, at great expense, and with
the participation of the holy and blessed in all things,
the blessed Mar Sabhr-Ishö, Metropolitan Bishop of
Bêth Garmai, and of Mâr George, his disciple,
the Metropolitan of Adiabene,' <pb type="textAllignment"  n="74"/> concerning
whom we will afterwards speak, and of all the
Bishops of this diocese of Athor³ and Adiabene, the
temple was consecrated and beautified with all holy things.
of Margâ, it has been thought proper to give the full texts of
these at the end of this chapter. They are edited from two
copies which I caused to be made from an old MS. at Môşul
while on a mission to Mesopotamia for the Trustees of the
British Museum. They afford an interesting insight into the
history of Sâhdônâ, and into the character of Isho'-yahbh, and
give an idea of the internal troubles which beset the Nestorian
Church at that period.
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 124, col. 1.
2 See Bk. ii. chaps. xii-xv.
3 I. e., the diocese of Môşul. See Payne Smith, Thes.,
col. 421. For monasteries situated in this district see Hoff-
mann, Auszüge, pp. 175-179.
.ܘܐܬܩܕܫ Read 4
<pb n="132"/>And a short time after these things Mâr Isho-yahbh
wished to build a school near his cell, and to provide
it with all that was necessary, and to bring to it
teachers and masters and expositors, and to gather
together many scholars and to provide for them in all
things. And he had made ready in his mind, and had
resolved and decided to carry out this work in such
a way that for every child who was trained and
instructed therein the monastery might be near at hand
for the purpose of [his] becoming a disciple, so that
the school and the monastery might become one; the
school to give birth to and rear scholars, and the
monastery to teach and sanctify them for the labours
of the ascetic life. And he brought workmen and
builders to build what he wished.
LETTERS OF MAR ISHO-YAHBH CONCERNING SÂHDÔNÂ THE
APOSTATE.
I. To the clergy of Mâḥôzê dhě Arîwân.*
ܠܪ̈ܚܡܝ ܐܠܗܐ ܢܚܝ
ܐܬܓܠܝܬ ܗܫܐ ܗܝ ܛܘܥܝܝ ܒܦܘܪܤܐ ܕܡܢ ܨܒܘܬ ܢܦܫܞ. ܘܐܪܓܫܬ ܐܢܐ ܒܞ ܠܡܤܬܪܘܬܞ.
ܒܥܛܬ ܗܝ ܫܓܝܫܐܝܬ ܘܫܕܬ ܡܞ ܬܟܣܚܬܐ ܕܒܬܬܞ. ܘܩܡܬ ܓܘܡܕܢܐܝܬ ܠܥܝܢ ܟܠܝ
ܘܐܠܨܐ ܗܘܬ ܗܢܐ ܕܐܢܐ ܩܢܘܡܝ ܐܬܡܢܥ ܠܘܬܟܘܢ. ܘܕܢܬܚܫܒ ܐܟܚܕ ܥܠ ܗ̇ܝ ܕܡܬܒܥܝܐ.
ܘܕܢܬܠ ܬܘܪܨܐ ܡܥܕܪܢܐ ܠܢܟܝܢܐ ܕܓܕܫ. ܛܥܝܢܢ ܓܝܪ: ܢܠ ܕܠܒܪܡܐ ܚܣܝܪ ܒܘܝܢܐ.
ܩܠܝܠ
ܡܢ
ܡܬܚܘܝܢܘܬܐ ܕܫܦܝܪܘܬ ܐܣܟܝܡܐ ܘܡܣܒܪܢܘܬܐ. ܠܘܬ ܪܘܡܐ ܕܪܫܢܘܬܐ ܡܛܝܢܝܗܝ:
ܟܕ ܠܐ ܩܕܡܢܢ ܐܪܓܫܢܢ. ܒܡܨܛܠܝܢܘܬܗ ܕܡܢ ܫܘܒܚܐ ܕܐܪܬܕܘܟܣܝܐ. ܗܿܝ ܕܩܕܡ ܩܠܝܠ
* Extracts from this letter have been published by Assemânî,
B. O., iii, pars 1, pp. 116, 117 and 137. The passages omitted
by him are enclosed in brackets ( . ).
<pb n="133"/>
ܕܡܫܡܫܢܞ ܢܓܟܬ ܒܟܠ ܕܪ ܤܥܝܗܘܢ ܕܡܪ̈ܚܐ܆ ܡܢ ܢܘܣܐ ܕܝܘܪܬܢܗ ܕܡܪܝܐ. ܒܟܬܒܐ
ܗܢܘܢ
<pb n="134"/>ܚܕܝܥܘܬܐ ܕܒܥܠܡܐ ܢܩܢܘܢ، ܡܛܠ ܗܢܐ ܗܟܝܠ ܐܦ ܓܒܪܐ ܗ̇ܘ ܗܕܝܘܛܐ ܠܘܬ ܫܛܘܪܘܬܐ
ܐܠܨܬܐ ܕܬܒܥܐ ܐܟܬܒ. ܗ̇ܘ ܕܡܢ ܕܝܠܝ ܘܡܢ ܟܠܗܘܢ ܕܐܟܩܬܝ ܛܫܝܗ. ܝܕܡܐ ܠܬܟܝܠܘܬܐ ܗ̇ܝ
ܨܕ ܡܥܕܪ̈ܢܘܗܝ ܘܐܬܟܠܘܗܝ.
ܥܠ
ܡܢ
ܐܣܐ
ܒܚܡܝ
ܡܬܛܦܝܤܢܘܬܗ ܕܓܒܪܐ ܚܣܝܪ ܗܘܢܐ. ܚܟܝܬ ܣܐܘܕܝܬ ܠܡܪܢ. ܕܠܐ ܟܐܡܬ ܫܒܩ ܠܥܒܕܗ
ܗܘܢܐ܆ ܠܡܟܣܘܬܢܝ ܕܤܪܝܩܝܬ ܛܪܝܬ ܗ ܘܠܡܘܕܘ ܠܟܠܩ ܕܥܒܕ ܨܒܝܗ ܘ
See B. O., iii. 1, p. 116, col. 2, 1. 23.
<pb n="135"/>
ܗܟܝܠ ܣܥܪ ܒܡܥܒܕܢܘܬܗ ܕܣܛܬܐ܆ ܓܒܪܐ ܗܘ ܫܛܘܬܐ ܘܤܡ ܢܦܗ ܥܠܬܐ ܒܝܫܬܐ.
ܚܘܪ
ܐܟܙܪܬ. ܘܒܢ̈ܝ ܬܪܒܝܬܝ ܘܫܘܬܢ̈ܐ ܒܦܝܪܘܬ ܪܥܝܢܝ
ܠܟܠܢܫ ܕܥܒܕܐ ܡܣܝܠ
ܬܚܘܘܢ ܥܘܫܬܐ ܕܗܝܡܢܘܬܟܘܢ ܒܬܚܘܝܬܐ ܕܣܘܥܪ̈ܢܐ. ܘܠܐ ܠܓܚܪ ܬܬܠܘܢ ܒܟܘܢ ܐܬܪܐ
ܠܟܠܩ:
ܣܘܟ̈ܠܐ
ܐܠܗܘܬܐ
<pb n="136"/>ܕܡܪܪܐ ܠܟܘܢ ܝܬܝܪ ܡܢ ܟܠܢܫ ܙܕܩܐ ܘܡܬܬܚܝܒܐ. ܠܡܩܡ ܓܢܒܪܐܝܬ ܠܩܘܒܠܞ.
ܒܛܝܒܘܬܗ ܕܐܠܗܐ. ܐܦ ܟܬܒܐ ܗܿܘ ܕܡܬܩܪܐ ܕܗܘܦܟ ܚܘܐ. ܕܐܬܬܣܝܡ ܩܕܡ ܫܠ̈ܝܐ
ܗܘܬ ܠܡܕܩܘ ܒܡܚܦܛܢܘܬܐ ܕܐܢܪ̈ܝܢ. ܘܣܦܩܐܝܬ ܡܪܣ ܠܚܣܝܪܘܬ ܪܟܝܗܘܢ ܕܛܥܝܐ
ܛܒܐ ܐܢܬ ܗܘܐ ܠܝ ܡܛܠܬܗ ܗܿܝ ܕܗܘ ܐܟ ܓܒܪܐ ܛܪܟܢܐ ܕܡܓܪܓ ܗܪܬܐ ܘܡܦܪܣܐ
ܕܫܓܘܫܝܐ ܕܥܕܬܗ ܕܐܠܗܐ. ܡܕܥܐ ܕܣܦܩ ܐܫܬܟܚ ܒ. ܩܪܘ ܗܟܝܠ ܐܦ ܠܨܚܐ ܗ̇ܘ.
ܡܟܘܢ.
ܨܒܝܗ ܒܟܠܥܕܢ. ܟܠܗܘܢ ܚܡܬܐ ܕܚܝܝܟܘܢ ܐܡܝܢ ܀
ܛܒ ܠܡܥܒܕ
ܠܢܟܦܐ ܘܪܚܡ ܐܠܗܐ ܐܚܘܢ ܚܒܝܒ .I. To Mr.Sahdá the Bishop
* The next four lines are quoted in B. O., iii. I, p. 137, col. 2.
See B. O., ii. 1, p. 117, col. 1, 1. 32.
<pb n="137"/>
ܥܕܬܐ ܕܩܪܝܬܝܗܝ ܒܠܝܠܟ̈ܬܐ ܩܕܡ ܐܢܒܝܢ ܘܡܦܪ ܠܗܘܢ܆ ܘܗܟܢܐ ܐܬܬܟܠܬ ܕܦ ܠܐܚܪܢܐ
ܝܬܝܪ ܡܢ ܐܚܪ̈ܢܐ ܣܘܥܪ̈ܢܐ. ܘܒܕܓܘܢ ܐܫܬܓܢܝܬ ܐܝܟ ܕܐܫܬܓܢܬ. ܘܟܬܒܬ ܒܚܣܝܪܘܬ
ܡܐ ܕܬܒܥܐ ܗܘܬ ܣܢܝܩܘܬܗ ܕܣܘܥܪܢܐ ܕܐܢܬ ܬܞܩܢ ܐܝܠܝܢ ܕܙܕܩܢ. ܘܬܫܕܪ ܠܩܕܡܝ
ܡܢܢ ܐܪ̈ܬ ܐܘ ܡܢ ܒܥܠܕܒܠܝܢ. ܘܐܢ ܓܕܫ ܘܦܘܠܓܐ ܕܤܪܝܩܘܬ ܚܘܠܒܐ ܥܪܨ ܥܠܟ. ܘܣܒܪ
<pb n="138"/>ܒܡܝܚܐ. ܘܕܠܐ ܗܘܐ ܕܠܝܠܐܝܬ ܡܬܛܦܝܤܝܢ ܫܬܗܐ ܗܠܝܢ ܠܡܦܩ ܡܢ ܣܘܪ̈ܠܝܗܘܢ ܚܟܚܬܐ.
ܘܥܠܘܗܝ
ܚܕ
1 See Assemânî, B. O., iii. i. 118, col. 1.
2 See B. O., iii. I, p. 82, col. 1, 1. 11
3 The next five lines are quoted in B. O., iii, 1, p. 138, col. 1.
<pb n="139"/>
ܡܗܘܢ
ܘܤܝܦܐ ܠܟ ܡܢ ܟܕܘ ܫܛܘܪܘܬܐ ܕܢܐܟܬ ܫܡܐ. ܠܘܬ ܓܘܡܨܐ ܕܪܡܬܐ ܕܗܒܛܝܩܐ
ܦܪܨܘܦܐ ܡܢܘܡܐ. ܝܠܦ ܗܟܠ ܡܢ ܡܪ̈ܘܗܝ ܕܠܫܐ܆ ܕܠܩܢܘܡܐ ܐܝܦܘܣܛܣܝܣ ܩܪܝܢ.
<pb n="140"/>ܚܣ ܬܓܟܫ
ܡܛܠ ܟܠܗܝܢ: ܠܡܥܪܩ ܡ ܦܐ ܕܤܛܢܐ ܕܐܣܬܩܒܠ ܠܟ. ܐܢܐ ܝܕܝ ܐܬܐ ܕܐܡܫܪ ܐܟܰܬ
ܡܥܠܢܐ ܪܘܝܚܐ ܠܬܪܥܝܬܐ ܕܗܪܛܝܩܐ. ܗܢܐ ܡܥܕܪܢܐ ܗܘ ܕܗܪ̈ܛܝܩܐ. ܘܠܘ ܣܚܘܦܐ. ܐܦܠܐ
ܓܝܪ ܗܢܘܢ
ܒܣܘܓܐܐ ܕܝܢ ܐܪ̈ܬܕܘܟܣܐ ܘܩܘܕܚ ܫܦܝܪ. ܗܟܢܐ ܗܟܝܠ ܐܦ ܨܕ ܗܠܝܢ ܕܝܠܟ ܡܬܦܢܝܐ
II. To Hormizd, Bishop of Laphat, concerning Sahdona.
ܟܠܗܝܢ. ܘܒܕܠܐ ܕܝܢ ܐܨܛܒܝܬܘܢ ܠܡܞܝܡܢܘ. ܗܐ ܐܝܬܝܗ ܣܛܢܐ ܠܤܗܕܘܢܐ ܓܠܝܐܝܬ ܘܤܩܗ
ܒܡܨܥܬܟܘܢ.
<pb n="141"/>
ܟܬܒܘܗܝ ܫܛܘܪ̈ܐ ܕܣܗܕܘܢܐ܆ ܒܠܡܘܬܐ ܕܠܒܝܫܘܬ ܗܝܡܢܘܬܗ. ܘܐܢ ܬܓܕ ܬܘܒ ܕܐܦ
ܗܝܡܢܘܬܗܘܢ
܆ ܐܪ̈ܬܕܘܟܣܐ ܐܢܬܘܢ܆
ܕܐܦܣܩܘܦܐ
:
I
See Assemânî, B. O., iii. i. 118, col. 2.
.ܕܪܘܡܝܐ Assemani -
<pb n="142"/>ܕܠܫܪܒܐ ܝܕܬܢܝܐ. ܣܕ ܐܝܬ ܠܗܘܢ ܫܡܐ ܘܐܝܩܪܐ ܕܐܦܣܩܘܦܐ. ܐܦܠܐ ܕܢܤܓܦܘܢ ܠܥܕܬܗ
ܘܚܢܓܬܐ ܐܝܬܝܗܘܢ ܗܘܘ܆ ܡܢ ܒܬܪ ܕܠܩܘܪܠܘܣ ܒܦܪܨܘܦܐ ܕܡܬܦܨܢܘܬܐ ܩܒܠܘ. ܗ̇ܢܘܢ
ܕܟܕ ܐܫܬܩܠ
ܕܐܬܐ ܡܝܬ ܣܘܙܒܐ ܐܫܬܟܚ
ܘܕܢܘ ܛܒܝܬ. ܕܟܠ ܒܝܫܐ ܕܐܫܬܕܝܬ ܠܒܪ ܡܢ ܥܕܬܐ: ܠܐ ܡܬܘܡ ܤܓܦܬ ܠܥܕܬܗ
<pb n="143"/>
ܘܨܠܐ ܥܠܝ]܀
ܐܠܗܐ ܡܨܚܝ
ܕܠܘܬ ܗܘܪܡܙܕ ܐܦܣܩܘܦܐ ܡܛܠ .IV. To Hormizd, Bishop of Laphat
ܡܬܥܢܝܢ. ܕܠܐ ܩܘܢܟܝܢܘܣ ܡܬܚܫܒܐ ܠܢ ܨܒܢܬܐ. ܐܢ ܐܝܢ ܘܐܝܬܝܬ ܕܠܐ ܩܐܢܕܝܢܪܣ ܘܐ
ܐܚܐ ܕܝܠܢܙ ܥܠ ܡܐ ܕܠܨܐܝܬ ܪܕܩ ܗܘܐ ܠܡܟܬܒ ܡܛܠ ܕܬܟܝܠ ܐܢܐ ܕܡܬܡܛܝܢ ܠܘܬܟ
ܟܕ ܡܪܝܐ ܢܨܡ. ܠܡܘܤܦܘ ܗܫܐ ܠܝܬܣܢܝܩܘܬܐ]: ܐܠܐ܃ ܡܛܠ ܕܫܪܥܬ ܗܬ ܡܢ ܡܚܒܠܢܞ
See Assemâni, B. O., iii. i p. 118, col. 2.
ܐܝܟ ܥܐܢ has .0 .8 ܃
<pb n="144"/>V. To the Bishops of Bêth Garmai concerning Sähdônâ."
ܕܡܪܢ܆
ܢܣܝܢܐ ܣܓܝܐܐ ܕܩܕܡܘ ܓܕܫܘ ܐܠܦܘܢܝ.
ܓܝܪ ܩܕܡ
- See Assemini, B. 0., I. ., p, 119, col. l—I2, col. 2.
Assemâni has
<pb n="145"/>
ܕܡܦܘܠܘܣ ܡܠܠ. ܠܐ ܐܙܕܣܝܬ݂ ܡܪܚܡܢܟܬܐ ܣܟܠܐ ܕܝܠܢ. ܡܢ ܡܬܗܦܟܢܘܬܗ ܣܓܝܐܬܐ
ܕܒܟܠ ܐܬܪ. ܟܬܒ ܓܝܪ ܘܝܗܒ ܩܪܛܝܣܐ ܤܓܝܐܐ ܒܟܠܞ ܦܘܠܘܛܝܐ ܕܗܘܡܐ. ܟܕ
.ܒܟܬܝܒܬ Assemani has -
t
<pb n="146"/>ܡܢܢ ܢܚܫܝܘܗܝ. ܘܣܒܪܝܢܢ ܥܕܟܝܠ ܕܒܢܝܬ̈ܐ ܚܢܢ. ܘܡܕܢܐ ܕܒܢܝܢ̈ܡܐ ܐܝܬ ܠܢ. ܘܦܣܩ ܐܢܐ
:
ܬܪܝܩܝܐ. ܘܟܠܗ ܩܪܛܐ. ܘܪܘܙܘܣ ܘܟܘܣ. ܘܟܠܗܝܢ ܓܙܪܬܐ. ܘܩܘܣܛܢܛܝܢܐ ܘܟܠܗ
.ܪܝܦܛܩܝܢ Assemini has '
.ܩܘܪܝܠܘܣ Assemani spells the name -
.ol Longobardia) ܕܠܢܓܘܐܐ Read, with Assemani -
.ܘܪܝܠܝܘܬܐ Assemini has ܀
<pb n="147"/>
ܘܦܦܝܩܐܙ ܥܠܬ ܒܝܫܬܐ ܗܕܐ ܡܢ ܩܕܝܡ ܒܦܘܠܘܛܝܐ ܕܪܗܘܡܝܐ. ܘܓܒܪܐ ܬܡܝܗ̈ܐ ܘܡܠܦܬ̈ܐ
CHAPTER VII
OF RABBAN KAM-ÎSHỐ, THE HEAD OF THE MONASTERY, AND
OF HOW HE ELECTED TO OPPOSE MAR ISHO-YAHBH.
Now when the holy Rabban Kâm-Ishő, the head
of the monastery, and a large gathering of brethren
ܐܩܘܪܝܠܘܣ Assemini spells the name *
.ܪܝܦܛܟܝܢ Assemani has -
3 This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 124, col. 2
<pb n="148"/>of his own opinion and manner of life saw what the
Catholicus was doing, that he was preparing to bring³
uproar and noise upon them, and that henceforth they
must abandon the happiness and enjoyment of retirement,
and all the course of the ascetic life, the glory and
beauty of which seclusion, whether it be on the tongue,
or sight, or hearing, bringeth to a man, they were
all gathered together in the presence of Mår Catholicus,
and with gentle entreaties, and humble supplication,
they begged Mâr Catholicus exceedingly to desist from
this work which would injure them in several partic-
ulars, saying, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="75"/> "It is not good for [us] monks,
while dwelling in our cells, to be disturbed by the
sound of the chantings of the psalms and the singing
of the hymns and the offices, and by the noise of the
voices of the school boys and of those who keep
watch [by night]. We have neither found it in writing,
nor have we received it by report that such a thing
as this ever took place in any of the monasteries of
the fathers. We are destined for weeping and mourning
while we dwell in our cells, according to the doctrine
which we have learned from [our] books, and we have
also received [this] from our father Mâr Jacob, for
during his lifetime and on his departure from us he
did not command us that one should teach the other
.ܪܬܢܳܢܳܐ Read -
ضه Read
3 "Neque enim, aiebant, est hoc Monachorum opus, ut in
cellis nostris sedentes, audiamus cantiones, et sonos, et tripudia
puerorum, et nocturnos vigilantium adolescentium ludos". B. O.,
lii. 1, p. 126, col. I.
4 25% ". Presbyter
qui nocturno praesertim
officio decantando praeest." See B. O., iii. 2, p. 820ff.
<pb n="149"/>
to sing, and to read the offices from books. Cease
then from the effort of making us to become school
boys again, and instead let each man dwell in his cell,
and let each man read by himself. If, however, thou
wishest to build a school, behold all the towns, and
villages and the lands round about them; the whole'
land of Persia is thy dominion, build then wheresoever
thou wishest; but in this monastery a school shall not
be built, for if thou dost build a school here, we shall
all depart." And Mâr Catholicus said to them, "It is
not necessary for you to be angry at a matter which
would bring you honour, and which would expand and
increase the glory of this monastery. For since two
excellent things, as it were two effectual powers, viz.,
the one being practice, which is the learning of the
Divine Scriptures, and the other being spiritual con-
templation, which is established by the working of the
mind and understanding, would be perfected in this
place, this monastery, the house of our fathers, would
become a mirror of deeds to be emulated by the wise
and diligent, and the congregation of monks would
increase by reason of those who would be instructed
in doctrine in the school. And, moreover, I have the
power [to build] for two reasons which must overcome
all obstacles; first, because I have adorned and endowed
this monastery with property and earthly possessions,
* "ut alter alterum doceremus, aut alium quempiam literis
imbueremus; multoque minus, ut Scholares iterum evaderemus."
B. O., . I, p. 126, col. I.
singing.
choral - ܩܝܡܘܬ ܩܠܐ ,.e .ܐ ܩܝܡܣܬܐ
ܐܗܘ ܕ Read  ܶ
3 Hoffmann would read, in which case we must trans-
late "thy power is in the whole land of Persia."
<pb n="150"/>and secondly, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="76"/> because, spiritually,' I am master
of all monasteries and convents; and it is meet for
me to honour and adorn my own monastery especially
rather than to glorify the monasteries [of others].
Therefore, by the word of our Lord, cease ye to be
obstacles to the work, for the good pleasure of God,
the Lord of all, is therein."
CHAPTER IX.2
OF THE DEPARTURE OF RABBAN ĶÂM-ISHO AND THE
BRETHREN [WHO WERE WITH HIM] FROM [THIS] MONASTERY
TO HERPA,³ A VILLAGE OF SAPHSAPHA.
Now when Rabban Ķam-Isho, and Bĕrâz Sûrîn⭑
the head of the congregation, who after Rabban Ķâm-
ܘܕܒܕܪܐ ܕܪܘܚܝ Hofmann would read -
"And in that by the
ornament of my spirit I have power over all monasteries and
convents," etc.
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 125, col. 1.
3 Herpâ is mentioned together with Bêth Bôzî, Bîrtâ, Ḥleptâ,
Hatrâ, Bâshôsh, Rêsh'ên in Bk. IV, chap. 21, as being situated
in the province of Saphsâphâ, which according to Hoffmann,
(Auszüge, p. 223), embraced the region extending from the
southern slopes of the Hair mountains on the north and east
of the plain of Naukur along the Gômel river, and thence
along the Upper Ḥâzir river by Shermen and Shôsh to 'Aķrâ.
* A name compounded of Pers. barz "high", and Sûrên the
Iname of a noble Persian family. For examples of distinguished
men who bore the name Suren, Σουρήνας, Σουρήνης, and a
discussion upon it see Nöldeke, Geschichte der Perser, p. 438,
note 4 Bĕrâz Sûrîn is mentioned by name in the letter
which Isho-yahbh wrote to Ķâm-Îsho' and the other monks
of Beth 'Abhê concerning the election of an abbot. See supra
p. 104 and B. O., iii. I, p. 141, col. I. The famous convent
of Bêth 'Abhê lay to the south of Herpå. See the following
chapter (p. 152, 1. 19), and Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 226.
<pb n="151"/>
Isho obtained the headship of the monastery, saw that
they were irresistibly compelled to depart from the
monastery, because they were not able to withstand
Mår Isho-yahbh, they together with seventy solitaries
belonging to this congregation, made ready with one
accord and at night, unperceived by Mår Catholicus, they
went into the martyrium, and took away the coffin of
the holy Már Jacob their spiritual father. And thus
weeping, and crying, and murmuring, that they should
never again see this monastery, and that their departure
was for ever, they all went forth up above Ḥerpâ, a
village of Saphsâphâ, prepared to build a monastery in
which they might lay Rabban Jacob, and where they
might continue the course of their ascetic life and end
their days. And they had made ready to bring stones
and had prepared materials for the construction of a
temple and cells, and those blessed men did not per-
ceive that God would shortly bring them back to the
inheritance of their father Jacob.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="77"/>
CHAPTER X.
OF THE VISION WHICH MÂR ISHO-YAHBH SAW ON THE NIGHT
IN WHICH THE BRETHREN TOOK RABBAN JACOB AND
DEPARTED.
Now although the over-zealousness of the will of
Mâr Isho-yahbh was not praiseworthy in the sight of
these holy men, and appeared to them to be a hind-
rance, as indeed it was,-to their ascetic manner of
life, nevertheless it appeared that the zealousness' of
Hoffmann would read, but doubtfully arts.
<pb n="152"/>will of the holy man might at the end result in a
beautiful ending, and he, therefore, determined to make
it a good thing, however much it might be displeasing
to the monks. And the Lord Christ Himself, who
saw the thoughts of both parties, on the one side
Mâr Åshöʻ-yahbh wishing to build a school for the
increase of divine doctrine and spiritual growth, and
on the other, the monks fleeing away from this for
the sake of love for Him, that in quietness, and with-
out any disturbance, they might take pains to please
His Lordship, even as the Ashimonian³ desert in which
they lived taught them to do, showed Mâr Catholicus
on the night in which the holy men went forth, when
he was lying on the bed of his holiness, half asleep*
and half awake, a vision in which a large eagle, strong
of body and long of pinions, and having many eaglets
upon his back, went forth from the martyrium where
Rabban Jacob was buried, and flew away from the
monastery towards the north; and he heard the noise
of the twittering and the chattering of the eaglets
which were upon his back as if their food had been
taken away from them. And he woke up with a start
and the dream and the vision which he had seen made
him marvel and wonder. And he called for the sacristan
by the hand of his disciple, and he came to him, and
before he could question him the sacristan said to him,
by
Read og.
.ܕܝܘܠܦܢܐ Read 2
3 In Payne Smith, Thes. col. 406, x is explained
Up oop "a place without water," and in Duval's Bar
Bahlul, (Paris 1888, pt. 1, col. 307) it is said to be the name
of a place.
-probably by, or
* The remaining part of this chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1,
p. 125, col. 2.
<pb n="153"/>
"A short time ago the head of the monastery and Bĕráz
Sûrên came with seventy men, and they took the body
of Rabban Jacob and departed; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="78"/> and behold the
whole congregation is making ready to depart from
this monastery after them." And when the blessed
Mår Isho-yahbh heard these things, he knew that
what he wished to do was not the Will of God, and
he rose up on that day and wrote to the holy men to
I come back to their monastery. And he departed to
Kuphlânâ his village, and he built there the school
which he had prepared to build in this monastery;
and those blessed men turned and came back to
their cells.'
* Soon after the expulsion of Sâhdônâ from the Nestorian
Church, and the quarrel with the monks of Bêth 'Abhê, Îsho'-
yahbh found himself involved in a serious dispute with Simon the
Metropolitan of Rew-Ardashîr (See Nöldeke, Geschichte der
Perser, p. 19) in Persia and of the Katrâyê, who refused obe-
dience to him as his diocesan, and who held views which were
not pleasing to him. Our knowledge of the reasons of the
dispute is limited, and can only be obtained from a series of
seven letters which Mâr Ish6'-yahbh wrote to Simon and the
Bishops of Persia, and to the monks and Church of Katar, a
district on the Persian Gulf near Baḥrên. In them he argues the
disputed points with considerable skill, and more than once
refers to his own work Huppakh Hushshâbhê, gọn (in
Arabic 1,31 B. O., iii. 1, p. 137), or "Refutation of (Here-
tical) Opinions," and they, like the letters which he wrote con-
cering Sâhdônâ, are excellent examples of his epistolary com-
positions. The full text of these letters is given at the end
of this chapter; and for a complete list of his letters see B. O., iii. I,
pp. 140-143. In addition to these works he wrote "Exhor-
tations for beginners [in the ascetic life]," thought by Assemânî
<pb n="154"/>LETTERS OF MAR ÎSHO-YAHBH CONCERNING THE DISPUTE
IN PERSIA AND KATAR.
L To Simon, Bishop of Rew-Ardashir.
ܠܘܬ ܫܡܥܘܢ ܐܦܣܩܘܦܐ
ܫܠܡ܀ ܦܓܥܐ ܕܡܨܡܚ ܒܢܡܘܣܐ ܪܘܚܢܝܐ. ܫܟܢܬ ܠܢ ܚܣܝܘܬܟ ܒܙܒܬܐ
ܒܬܢܕܪܬܐ ܕܦܪܨܘܦܐ ܒܪ ܬܫܡܬܐ ܘܒܐܓܪܬܐ ܕܠܡܐ ܐܟ ܤܘܬܚܐ ܕܨܒܝܢܟ ܪܚܡ ܛܒܬܐ.
ܠܡܪܢ.
ܠܘ ܕܢܚܕܐ ܒܠܚܘܕ ܩܠܝ ܕܟܪܒܬ ܘܫܠܚܬ. ܐܠܐ ܘܕܐܚܫ ܒܬܒܪܐ ܕܢܦܫ. ܒܥܘܬܕܢܐ ܒܝܦܐ
ܗܐ ܡܢ ܢܘܓܪܐ܆ ܕܡܢܟ ܐܣܬܒܪ ܥܠ ܓܢܝܚܬܐ ܕܐܣܬܥܪܝ. ܒܦܢܝܬܐ ܗܿܝ ܕܥܠܞ ܐܬܬܩܝܡܬ
to have been composed while he was a monk at Bêth 'Âbhê, and
he arranged the "Hudhra", or service-book for the Sundays of
the whole year, and drew up the offices of baptism, absolution,
and consecration. See B. O, iii. 1, pp. 139-141; Wright,
Syriac Literature, p. 843; and Badger, The Nestorians, vol. ii,
pp. 22-23.
2
* See B. 0., iii. 1, p. 27, ol. 2.
the inhabitants of the capital of ,ܡܘܠܐ ,.I. e '
<pb n="155"/>
:
ܕܐܡܪ ܓܒܪ
ܓܒܪ̈ܐ
ܗܢܐ ܕܒܘܚܪܢܐ ܡܢܗ ܡܢ ܡܒܘܥܐ ܕܟܪܣܛܝܢܘܬܐ. ܡܒܘܢܐ ܓܝܪ ܕܟܪܤܛܝܢܘܬܐ ܚܝܠܐ ܗܰܘ
ܢܣܬܥܪ
ܫܠܚܐ܆ ܡܢ ܫܠܝܚܐ ܨܝܕ ܡܝܦܠܢܝܗܘܢ: ܥܕܡܐ ܠܫܘܠܡܗ ܕܥܠܡܐ. ܘܐܢ ܡܢ ܥܨܝܢܘܬܐ ܢܨܒܘܢ
<pb n="156"/>ܕܘܒܪ̈ܐ ܪ̈ܘܚܢܝܐ܆ ܘܒܛܘܦܣܐ ܕܚܝܐ ܕܡܢ ܒܬܪ ܩܝܡܬܐ܆ ܐܝܟ ܕܡܨܡܚ ܒܟܠ ܐܬܪ ܕܐܬܩܪܝ
ܝܘܫܢܐ ܕܗܝܡܢܫܬܗܘܢ ܕܡܢ ܚܦܝܛܘܬܐ ܕܥܒܕܐ ܪ̈ܘܚܢܐ ܡܬܩܝܡ܆ ܐܦ ܣܥܪ ܒܐܝܕܝܗܘܢ ܡܪܢ
ܕܝܠܟܘܢ. ܒܚܐܦܝܪ ܘܒܟܪ̈ܣܛܝܢܝܞ. ܘܥܒܕ ܐܢܘܢ ܐܝܟ ܕܨܒܐ. ܒܠܡܘܬܐ ܘܡܬܡܥܢܘܬܐ
ܕܚܠ̈ܦܐ܆ ܘܡܠܝܐ ܩܫܬܩܐ ܕܟܪ̈ܣܛܝܢܐ. ܩܐܦ ܓܝܪ ܛܝܝܐ ܗܠܝܢ ܕܒܗܘܢ ܝܗܕܒ ܐܠܗܐ ܒܙܒܢܐ
ܕܟܪܣܛܝܢܘܬܐ ܠܐ
'See B. O., iii. 1, p. 128, col. 2, 1. 26.
<pb n="157"/>
ܠܡܕܪܨܘ
ܠܡܣܒܪܘ ܡܕܡ
ܚܣܝܘܬܟ ܫܠܟ̈ܐ ܘܐܓܪ̈ܬܐ ܕܠܡܐ ܠܩܬܘܠܝܩܐ ܕܩܕܡܚ. ܘܕܐܦ ܐܫܬܕܪ ܠܟ ܫܠܡܐ
ܩܠܞ ܩܠܗ Var ܀
* See Proverbs xxv. 20.
.ܠܩܢ̈ܚ Assemani has : .ܐܦ Assenmini omits 4
<pb n="158"/>ܡܬܓܡܪܝܢ ܕܘܒܪ̈ܐ ܡܝܬܪ̈ܐ: ܕܐܝܬܝܗܘܢ ܬܘܪܣܝܐ ܕܚܐ ܕܟܪ̈ܣܛܝܢܐ܆ ܘܝܬܝܢ̈ܐܝܬ ܒܙܒܢܐ
ܐܢ ܐܝܢ ܘܡܘܕܝܬܘܢ ܗܟܢܐ. ܘܬܦܦ ܘܢܬܘܦ ܠܘܬܟ ܡܢ ܕܪܫ ܫܩܝܐ ܡܚܝܢܐ ܕܐܒܥ ܩܢܘܢܐܝܬ
ܒܚܕ ܐܝܟܐ ܕܨܠܘܬܐ ܕܥܠܝ܆ ܕܩܕܝܟ̈ܘܗܝ ܕܐܠܗܐ ܘܕܟܠܗ ܥܕܬܗ. ܗܿܝ ܕܙܒܢ̈ܝܢ ܣܓܝ̈ܐܢ
:
ܝܫܘܥܝܗܒ ܐܟܣܢܝܐ ܕܡܞܡܫ ܒܛܝܒܘܬܗ .II. To Simon, Bishop of Persia
ܕܐܠܗܐ ܥܕܬܐ ܩܬܟ̈ܠܝܩܐ ܕܡܕܢܚܐ. ܠܐܚܘܢ ܡܪܝ ܫܡܥܘܢ ܐܦܤܩܘܦܐ ܡܝܛܪܦܘܠܝܛܣ ܘܐܦ
.ܠܗܘܢ Assemani has“
<pb n="159"/>
ܩܠܝܠ ܕܝܠܟ ܕܠܘܬܝ ܚܦܝܛܘܬܐ ܪܒܬܐ ܗܕܬ ܠܝ܆ ܠܡܟܬܒ ܠܟ ܩܕܡ ܩܠܠ. ܘܒܕܓܘܢ
2
See B. O, iii. 1, p. 132, col. 1.
.ܕܗܝܡܢܘܬܐ One copy omits
<pb n="160"/>ܥܠ
ܒܠܚܘܕ ܗܠܝܢ ܕܐܦ ܚܠܦ ܚܒܪ̈ܝܟܘܢ ܡܪ̈ܘܢܝܐ ܐܫܕܢ. ܒܪܡ ܐܬܚܙܝܬܼ ܠܝ
ܕܠܒܝܬ
ܠܡܪܝ ܬܐܕܘܪܐ ܐܦܣܩܘܦܐ ܕܗܘܪܡܙܕܐܪܪܫܝܕ܃ ܘܡܪܝ ܓܝܘܪܓܝܣ ܐܢܣܩܘܢܐ ܒܘܫܬܪܐ.
ܘܡܤܘܚܝܢܢ ܠܡܬܠ ܠܟܘܢ. ܠܐ ܒܠܚܘܕ ܤܒܪܬܗ ܕܡܫܝܚܐ ܐܠܐ ܐܦ ܢܦܫܢ. ܡܛܠ ܕܚܒܝܒܝܢ
ܐܐ ܗܘܪܡܙܕܐܪܕܫܝܪ but read ,ܕܞܘܐܡܙܪܐܕܫܝܪ Assemani gives -
اردشير
see Nöldeke, Geschichte der Perser, p. 19, note 5.
.ܘܠܡܬܠ Assemani has 2
<pb n="161"/>
ܥܠ
ܕܠܘܬ ܐܦܣܩܘܦܐ ܕܩܛܪܝܐ܀ - .I. To the Bishops of the Ketraye
See B. O., iii. 1, p. 133f.
<pb n="162"/>ܣܢܝܩܐ. ܕܠܐ ܗܘܘܢ
ܚܬܗ. ܛܟ ܢܩܪܝܟܘܢ
IV. To the etriyê.
ܕܠ ܐܠܗܐܙ ܢܟ ܓܒܪܐ ܕܐܬܬܣܝܡܬ ܥܠܘܗܝ ܨܦܬܐ ܕܐܗܘܬܐ ܕܪܘܚܙ ܥܡ ܫܘܡܗܐ
ܡܢܣܘܢ.
ܐܦ ܠܟܘܢ. ܩܨܒܝܬ ܐܝܟ ܐܣܝܐ ܣܟܘܠܬܢܐ. ܕܠܞ ܠܥܠܬܐ ܟܝܢܝܬܐ ܕܟܘܪܗܢܐ ܐܚܠܡ ܚܦܝܛܐܝܬ
ܡܕ
<pb n="163"/>
ܕܐܒܕܢܐ ܕܡܢ ܗܝܡܢܘܬ. ܟܕ ܨܒܝܬ ܐܢܐ ܠܡܩܕܡ ܘܠܡܟܠܐ ܒܚܝܠܐ ܕܡܥܕܪܢܣܬܐ ܕܪܘܚܐ[
I
See B. O., iii. I, p. 134. col. 2.
- This clause is omitted in some copies.
ܡܥܠܝܐ
<pb n="164"/>ܕܟܪ̈ܣܛܝܢܐ ܐܝܬܝܗܘܢ:
ܕܒܢܪܣ.
ܫܠܝܛܢܐ ܕܬܡܢ ܘܐܦ ܨܕ ܫܠܝܛܐ ܪܒܐ ܕܠܥܠ ܡܢ ܫܠܝܛܢ̈ܐ ܕܒܙܒܬܐ ܗܢܐ. ܡܬܚܘܞ
See B. O., iii. I, p. 135, col. 2.
<pb n="165"/>
'
.
$
ܕܒܟܠܙܒܢ ܥܠ ܥܘܕܪܢ̈ܐ ܇ ܕܗܝܡܢܘܬܟܘܢ܆ ܘܥܠ ܩܘܝܣܐ ܢܡܘܣܝܐ ܕܟܗܢܘܬܐ
.ܪܝܕܝܢ ܘܕܡܫܡܗܝܓ ܘܕܬܠܘܢ ܘܕܚܛܐ ܘܕܗܓܪ Assemani has '
<pb n="166"/>ܒܠܚܘܕ ܠܫܘܠܛܢܐ ܕܟܪܤܛܝܢܬܐ ܠܐ ܨܪܝܢ ܠܡܪܥܒܕܘ. ܘܟܕ ܠܟܠ ܫܘܠܛܢ ܕܠܒܪ
ܡܟܣܐ. ܘܠܡܢ ܕܕܚܠܬܐ ܕܚܠܬܐ. ܘܠܡܢ ܕܐܝܩܪܐ ܐܝܩܪܐ. ܘܫܘܥܒܕܐ ܕܝܢ ܢܡܘܣܝܐ: ܗܢܘ ܕܚܕ
ܝܨܝܟܘܢ ܒܩܘܫܬܐ. ܘܣܐܢܘ
ܒܪܓܠܝܟܘܢ ܛܘܝܗ ܕܐܘܢܓܠܝܘܢ ܕܠܡܐ ܘܤܝܡܘ ܤܢܘܪܬܐ ܕܦܘܪܩܢܐ. ܘܢܚܘܕܘ ܣܝܦܐ
ܕܡܛܠ
<pb n="167"/>
ܕܥܕܬܗ ܕܐܠܗܐ. ܒܥܘܕܪܗ ܕܐܠܗܐ ܘܤܒܘ ܛܝܩܘܬܐ ܣܢܝܬܐ: ܡܢ ܩܕܡܫ ܩܘܕܬ̈ܐ ܪ̈ܘܚܢܝܐ.
ܡܠ
.
ܐܓܪܬܐ ܕܬܪܬܝܢ .V. Secund letter to the inhabitants of Katir
<pb n="168"/>:
ܕܝܢ ܤܢܝܩ ܣܛܢܐ ܕܢܐܬܐ ܨܐܕܝܟܘܢ ܒܫܡ ܐܢܛܝܟܪܝܣܛܘܣ܆ ܐܣܬܥܪ ܠܗ ܡܢ ܟܕܘ ܨܐܕܝܟܘܢ.
ܕܡܣܬܥܪ ܦܫܝܩܐܝܬ ܐܝܟ ܕܐܦ ܗܠܝܢ ܐܣܬܥܪ. ܟܡܐ ܓܝܪ ܕܡܫܡܢܐ ܒܝܬܐ ܕܣܘܥܪ̈ܢܐ
ܡܬܬܙܝܥܝܬܘܢ܆
ܚܡܝܡܝܬ ܛܢܢܐ ܕܒܟܘܢ.
ܢܙܕܥܙܢܘܢ
VI. To the solitaries in the country of the Ketrayê. Mads]
ܚܫܕܝܐ ܕܒܒܝܬ ܩܛܪ̈ܝܐ܀ ܛܒܐ ܡܦܝܪܩܬ ܩܘܡܟܘܢ ܕܚܠܦ ܢܡܣܐ ܪ̈ܘܚܢܝܐ ܐܘ 1-
ܚܒܒܐ. ܐܝܬܝ ܠܝ ܐܘܢ ܡܝܩܪܐ ܡܪܝ ܓܝܘܪܓܝܣ ܐܦܣܩܘܦܐ ܡܝܛܪܦܘܠܝܛܣ ܕܡܝܫܢ.
ܫܪܝܬܘܢ
ܠܡܣܥܪ.
<pb n="169"/>
ܡܚܫܒܬܐ ܘܟܠ ܪܘܡܐ ܕܡܬܬܪܝܡ ܠܘܩܒܠܝܕܢܬܗ ܕܐܠܗܐ. ܘܫܒܝܢܢ ܟܠ ܬܪ̈ܥܝܢ ܠܡܬܡܥܢܘܬܗ
ܕܐܠܗܐ܆ ܐܠܐ ܡܢ ܛܢܢܐ ܒܠܚܘܕ ܩܛܠ ܓܝܪ ܠܡܨܪ̈ܝܐ ܥܘܠܐ ܘܐܟܣ ܠܐܝܣܪܠܝܐ ܛܠܘܣܐ.
ܐܫܬܘܝ܆ ܘܚܝܠܐ ܕܫܠܝܚܘܬܐ ܡܢ ܫܡܝܐ ܫܩܠ܆ ܘܛܘܦܣܐ ܕܡܠܟܘܬܐ ܕܫܡܝܐ ܠܒܢܝܢ̈ܢܐ ܐܠܦ:
ܒܙܒܢ ܐܦ ܠܘܩܒܠܗܘܢ ܕܪܢܐ ܕܫܠܝܚܐ ܘܥܡܕܐ ܕܥܕܬܐ܆ ܐܙܝܥ ܚܝܠܐ ܕܛܢܗ ܡܛܠ
<pb n="170"/>ܗܢܘܢ
ܠܡܩܡ ܚܦܝܛܐܝܬ
ܕܬܫܒܘܚܬܗ. ܕܒܚܝܠܐ ܬܫܬܪܪܘܢ ܒܪܘܚܗ. ܕܒܒܪܢܫܟܘܢ ܕܠܓܘ ܢܡܪ ܡܝܚܐ ܒܗܝܡܢܘܬܐ
ܠܡܕܪܟܘ ܥܡ
ܘܡܢ ܡܚܦܛܢܘܬܗ ܕܒܕܚܠܬ ܐܠܗܐ܆ ܬܝ ܕܚܝܒ ܗܕܝܬ ܠܡܚܦܛܘܬܗ ܒܙܒܪܐ ܗܢܐ ܠܡܟܒܕ
<pb n="171"/>
VII. The second Epistle to the solitaries in the country of
ܒܐܘܢܓܠܝܘܢ .the Ketraye
•
<pb n="172"/>"
ܨܒܝܬܘܢ
ܠܡܦܪܫ ܘܠܡܪܚܩܘ ܢܦܫܟܘܢ܆ ܡܢ ܕܬܢ ܘܐܒܝܪܡ ܘܩܘܪܚ ܟܗܢܐ ܘܐܦܠܐ ܕܝܠܟܘܢ܆
<pb n="173"/>
·
ܘܗܟܬ
<pb n="174"/>pp Sea
for 23 op No
ܘܡܪܝܐ ܢܚܘܣ ܥܠ ܥܡܗ ܘܩܛܪ ܒܚܢܢܗ ܠܥܕܬܗ ܩܕܝܫܐ ܡܢ ܟܠ ܢܟܝܢܝܢ. ܥܕܡܐ
lips 25000000702
#
CHAPTER XI.:
OF RABBAN ANÂN-ÎSHO' THE DOCTOR, AND MONK, AND
COMPILER OF THE "BOOK OF PARADISE." ³
It is not right that the glorious memory of the
holy. Abba Anan-Isho+ should drop out from our
mind, or that we should suppress the mention of his
indefatigable zeal, on the contrary, let us place his
noble acts among [those of] his companions, for happi-
ness at the right hand of our Lord Christ is [also]
laid up for him with them. Now this blessed man
'Anân-Isho and Åsho'-yahbh' his brother came from the
country of Adiabene; they were both trained in doctrine
in the city of Nisibis, being children of the school and
love and household of the blessed Mâr Åshö-yahbh [of
Adiabene]. They became disciples in the Great Mon-
astery [of Izlâ], as the books which belong to them in
the library of this monastery testify, for they shew that
2
* Parts of this chapter are quoted in B. O., iii. 1, pp. 139,144.
Properly 'Anâ-n[i]-Isho'. See Hoffmann, Opuscula Nes-
toriana, p. iv.
3 See infra, p. 189f.
+ 'Anân-Isho' and his brother I sho'-yahbh were fellow-students
at Nisibis with Isho'-yahbh III., and afterwards entered the great
convent on Mount Izlâ; they flourished about the year 645.
See Wright, Syr. Lit., p. 843; B. O., iii. 1, p. 144, col. 1.
5 He afterwards became Bishop of Kârdâlîâbhadh. (See p. 177).
<pb n="175"/>
they were written by their hands there. Now Abba
Anân-Isho having lived the life of an ascetic with all
excellence, and having his mind constantly fixed upon
the works of the ascetic fathers, determined to go and
worship in Jerusalem. And from there he went to the
desert of Scete,' where he learned concerning all the
manner of the lives of the ascetic fathers, whose
histories and questions are written in books, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="79"/>
and concerning their dwellings, and the places in
which they lived. And when he turned to come back
he made his journey by way of the [monastery of the]
holy Mar John, Bishop of the Scattered, of whom I
have made mention a little way back, that he might
be blessed by his holiness,³ and enjoy his conversation.
And after he had come to his own monastery,* he
took his brother, and they came to this monastery
[of Beth 'Abhe] by reason of the annoyance and con-
tention which had taken place there, for certain men
who were slanderers, and who set themselves against
holy men, had risen up there, and they drove out the
holy Rabban Narsai, the disciple of Mår Båbhai, who
finally became head of the monastery³ and was renown-
ed for a life of excellence. And concerning Mår
Narsai the holy Mår Isho-yahbh, when he was Bishop
of Nineveh, wrote a letter to the Great Monastery,
blaming them, and saying, "Ye have not acted rightly
towards that [holy] man in making him a stranger
* See supra, p. 39, note 3.
.ܩܕܝܫܘܬܗ Read 3
2 See supra, p. 129.
I. e., Mount îzlâ.
5 See chap. 18. Narsai succeeded Bâbhai as head of the
Monastery of Izlâ after A. D. 628. See B. O., iii. 1, p. 455,
col. 2. He is probably the Narsai to whom Isho'-yahbh wrote
Letters Nos. 29 and 50.
<pb n="176"/>to your congregation." Now when they came to this
monastery, and dwelt in silence according to the rule
of ascetics, Rabban 'Anân-Îsho the wise of under-
standing laboured so hard in the study of books, that
he surpassed all who were before and after him in his
knowledge. And when Mâr Åshö-yahbh was Metro-
politan of Arbêl (Arbela)," and wished to draw up in
* Thomas is no doubt quoting from a letter which he had
at hand, but of which no copy seems to have come down to
us. No. 16 of the letters written by Mâr Isho'-yahbh while he
I was Bishop of Môşul is addressed to the monks of the Mon-
astery of Mount Izlâ, and refers to the expulsion of some of
the brethren. He says that he has twice written to them, and
that inasmuch as he has received no answer he is afraid that
I what he has heard by rumour of the quarrel which had broken
out among them, but which he never expected could be true,
has really happened. He describes the quarrel as the work of
the devil in the form of a man, and in a long exhortation ad-
vises them to remember their past glorious state, and to en-
deavour to bring it back again. Finally he says, "Go forth after
your brethren, and gather them together, and if it be necessary
for you to endure suffering, shrink not from it until ye have made
them dwellers together with you, and loving associates."
A
papal indi to as: axeso
ܘܦܪܩܘ
fol 17a.. It is probable that( ܐܢܘܢ ܠܟܘܢ ܒܢ̈ܝ ܡܥܡܪܐ ܘܫܘܬܦܐ ܕܚܘܒܐ
'Anân-Îsho' and his brother left the Monastery of Izlâ on ac-
count of the disturbance referred to in the above letter.
2 The chief town of Adiabene, situated about 70 miles east
of Môşul. Of Arbêl, Arbil, or Irbil, Jj (Yâķût, t. 1, p. 186ff.)
ܐܪܒܝܠ ܡܢ ܚܕܝܒ ܐܝܬܝܞ ܐܪ ܐܝܟ ܚܕܝܒ ܝܕܬ̈ ܕܝܠܝ ܥ܊ Bar-Bahlul says
*
* Spare Sonio in ogljes Duval, Syr. Lex.,
col. 280. The site is a very old one, and is mentioned in the
cuneiform inscriptions. See Schrader, Keilinschriften und das
Alte Testament, p. 441.
<pb n="177"/>
order a book of the Canons that he might send copies
of it to all the countries of his patriarchate, he made
the wise Abbâ 'Anân-Isho', the love of whom is very
dear and sweet to me," to sit with him during the
drawing up of the canons, because of the institutes
and rules which he had composed, and because he
found that he³ alone possessed in a sufficient measure
a clear mind, and a natural talent for the art of music,*
and a knowledge how to arrange words.
Now the excellent man, and elect of God, Isho-
yahbh, the brother of Anân-isho, was appointed Bishop
of Ķârdáliábhádh,³ that is Shennâ a city of Bêth
Rammân. And the noble 'Anân-isho" composed defi-
The librum horarum Canonicarum of Assemânî, B. O., iii. I,
p. 145, col. 1. For the regulations made by Ishô'-yahbh for
times of prayer, etc., see B. O., iii. 1, pp. 139, 305, and espe-
cially p. 526.
* Compare p. 88, line 3 (text) where Thomas says "I am
consumed with love for him," i. e., 'Anân-Î sho'. Strike out
note 2.
3 In note 3 read M. Assemânî has a (B. O., iii,
p. 139, col. 2).
• So savais.
5 Kardâlîàbhâdh, UT 5, is the old name of Shennâ dhě
Bêth Rammân, or Sinn Bârimma,
=
which was situated at
on the east bank
a distance of ten farsaḥ from Tekrît,
of the Tigris, below the spot where the Lower Zâb flows into
the Tigris. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 189, 253.
قوية في شرقى دجلة الموصل واليها نسب السن فيقال سن بارما
Yāķût, t. 1, p. 464, II. 20-22. According to B. M. Rich 7203,
fol. 1616, col. I, and B. M. Orient. 2441, fol. 3466, col. 2,
-Hoffmann suggests that Kardalia. مدينة السن – also جذجية
bhadh Kârdin-âbâd (cf. Rûbîl for Reuben), i. e., "Ķârdîn's
colony." Cf. Yazdîn-âbâd (text, p. 234. 19, 386. 16).
2
<pb n="178"/>nitions and divisions of various things,' <pb type="textAllignment"  n="80"/> which
were written upon the walls of his cell. And when his
brother Mår Isho-yahbh came to pray in this mon-
astery, and saw the divisions of the science of philo-
sophy of his brother 'Anân-isho, he begged him to
write a commentary on them for him, and to send it
to him, which 'Anân-Isho actually did. And he wrote
to him a clear exposition in many lines, from which
will be apparent to every one who readeth therein the
greatness of his wisdom; now the title of this work is,
"A letter³ which a brother wrote to his brother; to
the excellent and holy Mâr Åshö-yahbh the Bishop,
'Anân-Isho in the Lord, greeting." He also wrote a
work on the correct pronunciation of the words and
of the difficult words which are used with different
significations' in the writings of the Fathers, which
.ܡ Read 2
.ܕܡܕܡ Read -
.ܕܐܓܪܬܐ Read ܃
.ܥܢܢܝܫܘܥ ܣܡ ܫܘܚܠܦܐ ܘܦܘܪܫܐ ܕܝܰܝܬܐ )144 .p
* Compare the entry in 'Abhd-Ishô's Catalogue (B. O., iii. 1,
Assemânî refers to an
Exposition of obscure passages from the Book of Paradise, in
which unfortunately the name of the author is not given, but says
'an hujus Ananjesu sint, non ausim definire' (B. O., iii. 1, p. 146,
col. 2, at the foot). The famous "Book of Paradise" redacted
by 'Anân-Îsho' is described by Thomas in chapter 15 of this
book; see p. 189f. His work entitled Liber Canonorum de Aequi-
litteris, i. e., on the different pronunciation and signification of
words that are spelt with the same letters, has been published,
with the additions of Honain ibn-Ishak of al-Hirah, (died in 873)
and another compiler, by Hoffmann, Opuscula Nestoriana,
pp. 2-49.
5 In this work he followed in the footsteps of Joseph
Hûzâyà, and anticipated Jacob of Edessa and the monks of
Karkaph tha. Wright, Syr. Lit., p. 843, col. 1.
<pb n="179"/>
exists among the books in the library' of this convent,
and which surpasses all other collations in its accuracy;
and according to what I have learned concerning these
his [books] from the aged Elders, they were com-
pleted and given to us by him. Now when the
blessed Mâr Isho-yahbh the Catholicus departed this
temporary life, the holy Mar³ George became Patriarch
after him.
CHAPTER XII.4
OF THE BLESSED MAR GEORGE," THE CATHOLICUS.
This holy man Mår George came from Kaphrâ in
the province of Bêth Gâwâyâ, which is in the country
of Bêth Garmai; he was the son of rich and noble
.ܕܟܬܒܐ ܕܐܒܞܬܐ ܒܦܘܪܫ ܚܫܩܬܐ ܕܐܝܬ ܒܒܝܬ ܐܪܟ̈ܐ We must read here :
.ܡܢ ܚܝܐ ܕܙܒܢܐ Read -
See Hoffmann, Opuscula Nestoriana, p. V.
3 Strike out N after .
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 149f.
5 George, the disciple of Isho'-yahbh, was first Bishop of
Môşul, then Metropolitan of Adiabene, and finally Patriarch of
the Nestorians; he succeeded his friend Îshô'-yahbh A. D. 661
and sat until 680.
5. See B. O., iii. 1, pp. 153, 708.
ܬܫܒܚܐ ܘܥܘܠܝܬܐ ܘܟܪܘܙܘܬܐ܇ ܘܒܥܪ̈ܬܐ He wrote
a place on the naphtha mountains between کفری - جعد
6
Tûz Hurmatli and the Diyâla river. See Hoffmann, Auszüge,
P. 277.
7, a tract of land, Pers. plur. Arab.
This word is compared with. ارزاقات .plur رزاق
the Pehlevi PDD by J. Müller; see Lagarde, Gesammelte Ab-
handlungen, 1866, p. 81.
ܕܒܐܬܐܐ Read 8
<pb n="180"/>parents, and his father possessed in this country [of
Marga] two estates, Tellà dhě Zâllê, that is Tell-zallah,
and Beth Habbâ,' and he was sent by his parents to
watch and govern the affairs and business of these
estates. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="81"/> And when he went into the monastery
to pray and to be blessed by the ascetics and those
who dwelt therein, their manner of life was pleasing
in the sight of the blessed man, and he also wished
to inscribe himself with the seal of their divine service.
Now according to what I have learned from his kins-
folk, who possess written records of him, he became a
disciple after the death of Rabban [Jacob], and the
time itself shews us that it must have been subsequent
to this event, for at that period he had not yet arrived
at the age for being a disciple. It is probable that he
received the tonsure before Rabban Ķâm-Isho received
the office of head of the convent. And when his father
departed from this world, George entreated his brethren
that the village of Beth Habbâ might be given to him
as his share in the division of the inheritance, and he
gave it to this monastery [of Bêth 'Abhê]. Now when
the blessed Mar Isho-yahbh was Bishop of Nineveh
he saw the intelligence and good disposition and
humility of the young man George, and was drawn
to love him as the blessed Nectarius' loved Evag-
* See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 227 and note 675 (p. 74).
Tellâ dhe Zâllê and Bêth J. abbâ must have been situated very
near Beth 'Abhê.
2 Nectarius, the senator, a native of Tarsus, was made
Bishop of Constantinople by Theodosius; he died about A.D. 397.
Thomas of Margà probably means either Basil the Great or
Gregory Nazianzen. Socrates says (Hist. Eccles., iv. 23) that
Evagrius was ordained at Constantinople by Gregory Nazianzen,
<pb n="181"/>
rius,' and brought him to be his disciple. And when Mâr
Isho-yahbh became Metropolitan of Adiabene' he took
the excellent and humble George with him; and when Mâr
Isho-yahbh became Catholicus he made him Metropolitan
of this country (Margâ) in his place. So also when
he became Patriarch this same Mâr Isho-yahbh was
appointed general governor of the dominion of the
countries which were far away.³ And he had many
disciple and intimate friends, and one of them, George,*
he made Metropolitan of Pĕrâth dhe Maishân,' and
another George, to be distinguished from our George,
he made Metropolitan of Nisibis, by whom was com-
posed the hymn of praise for the consecration of a
church which begins:
"Glory to Thy mercy, Christ, our King,
"Son of God, adored by all."6
and Sozomen relates (Hist. Eccles., vi. 30) that when Gregory
occupied the see of Constantinople, he made Evagrius his
archdeacon. See also B. O., iii. 1, pp. 45, 151.
* Evagrius of Pontus born about A. D. 345, died 399.
2 I. e., azzâ or Irbil, Arbela.
3 He claims that in the East (i. e., Persia) more than twenty
bishops and two Metropolitans had been ordained by the "Church
of God;" see supra, p. 172, 1. 21.
4 In his first letter to the monks of Katar Îsho'-yahbh praises
the virtues of this George. See p. 168, 1. 28.
,"the Euphrates of Maishan فرا میسان رفته بضغ 5
a town on the Shatt al-'Arab opposite to the modern town of
al-Başra, I, and including Mohammera. Başra is about
65 miles above the mouth of the Shatt al-'Arab, and 40 miles
below the junction of the Tigris and Euphrates (Shatt al-'Arab).
Mohammera is ten miles from Başra. Maishân was the name
given to the district which extended from Ctesiphon and
Seleucia to the Persian Gulf.
6 See B. O., iii. 1, p. 152, col. I.
<pb n="182"/>Now both [these] Georges' were Persians by birth.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="82"/> Now when our Lord wished to gather [to
Himself] the holy Mâr Isho-yahbh, the fathers who
were [standing] near him entreated him, saying. "Whom
dost thou appoint, O Mâr Catholicus, to become
governor of the Church after thee?" And he answered
humbly, and said, "The choice doth not rest with me,
but with the fathers [who are] Bishops; but it appeareth
to me that of all our contemporaries it is most fitting
that George should be Catholicus;" and it came to pass
that George was appointed Catholicus. And when he
was appointed, according to the command of his holy
master, George of Nisibis, the Persian, was absent on
a mission to the land of Persia, on which he had been
sent by Mår Åshö-yahbh while he was alive. And
when he came back and heard that the Catholicus had
commanded, "George shall succeed me," and that he
had not distinctly stated which George, certain fair-
speaking, and malignant men disquieted³ him saying,
.must be corrupt ܐܚܪ̈ܢܐ but ,ܓܘܪܓܝܣ ܐܚܪܢܐ All the MSS have -
We might read 2 (compare for han in Hist. of Alex-
ander, ed. Budge, p. 1, 1. 10) and translate "these last [two]
ܒܢܰܝ ܚܐܢܰܐ ܦܪ̈ܣܝܐ Persian noblemen," or ,ܚܐܐ ܦܪ̈ܣܝܐ Georges,” or
or "sons of Persian noblemen."
3
flatterers, deceivers. In B. M. Orient. 2441,
fol. 3706, col. I, and Rich 7203, fol. 1796, col. 2, we have
المتحسّنين الخدامين المملقين:
عه فذ بيعهد التملّق ممحرق : عه فذيبضم لمع عن هذه المراياه التحسن
المحاباة الممخرق :
3 Assemânî "seductus à quibusdam adulatoribus aientibus."
(B. O., iii. 1, p. 152, col. 1.)
<pb n="183"/>
"It is meet that thou shouldst have the Patriarchate,
and there is no doubt that the Patriarch thy predecessor
made his testamentary deposition with reference to
thee." And having returned from Persia and having
arrived at Mědhînâthâ dhě Bêth Aramâyê,' he did not
go in [to visit] George the Catholicus, but he despised
him and held him in contempt, and in his pride he
left him and went to Nisibis.
CHAPTER XIII.2
OF THE HUMILITY AND GENTLENESS OF THE HOLY GEORGE,
THE CATHOLICUS, [AND OF GEORGE THE METROPOLITAN
OF NISIBIS].
Now since this holy man had, from his youth up,
placed himself under the yoke of the humility of Christ,
and had held himself to be of no account in comparison
with what was excellent, and in his own opinion³ had
set himself below every [other] man, he did not med-
itate within himself and consider, saying, "I am a
[distinguished man], the Catholicus, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="83"/> and I myself
have power to despise him that despised me, and I can
make a mock of him that held me in contempt,"
even although he had the power to prevent and put an
end to his ministration, until he should come and
apologize, and manifest penitence for his haughtiness.
I. e., Ctesiphon and Seleucia. See B. O., I, pp. 354, 356;
and Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 352, note 1997. On p. 84, 1. 1
2 This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 150, col. 1 ff.
.ܡܕܝܢ̈ܐ takes the place of ܡܚܘܬ̈ .)text)
.ܬܪܥܝܬܗ Read 3
<pb n="184"/>And moreover, that humble head [of the Church] was
not moved to wrath by any of these things, neither
did his exalted position overcome him, who while
standing as the head of the Church, and as a mighty
fountain from which holiness flowed down to all ranks,
nevertheless made use of that justice which alone is
fitting [before] God: on the contrary he meditated
wisely and he judged mercifully, in that he listened to
our Lord, Who said, "Whosoever among you wisheth
to be great, let him be last of all men, and a servant
of all men." And he rose up lovingly and he went
to the city of Nisibis to reconcile to him George the
Metropolitan, who was angry and wrathful with him.
Now the entry of Mâr Catholicus into the church of
Nisibis was arranged to take place when George and
all the city were gathered together in the temple at
the time of the Mysteries' on the first day of the
week. And when the Metropolitan who was in the
pulpit, saw the Catholicus coming in at the door, he
came down from the pulpit, and went out of the temple,
and departed to his cell. Now when he had done this
thing, the people of Nisibis were ashamed, and they
were exceedingly grieved and angry with their Metro-
politan, and they went up to him forthwith, and said
to him, "How is it that thou art not ashamed to do
this thing? How can we esteem thee a shepherd and
a head whilst thou despisest all the toil, and trouble,
and humility which Mâr Catholicus hath shewn thee?
Thou must know, however, that unless thou yieldest
thyself to be reconciled to him and art penitent for
thy two acts of folly, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="84"/>, namely in treating
I St. Matthew xx. 26,27.
2 The Holy Communion.
<pb n="185"/>
him lightly in Maḥozė,' and also at this present in
our city, we will neither be thy people, nor shalt thou
stand at our head;" and being compelled he came
down, and they each expressed their contrition by bow-
ing to each other to the ground. And Mår Catholicus
said, "Why hast thou raged and cut asunder the bonds
of fatherly subjugation? and why hast thou turned aside
the shoulder of humility from the yoke, and hast disturbed
the order which is incumbent upon the paternal throne?"
The Metropolitan said to him, "Our Master, Mår Isho-
yahbh, of holy memory made' a testamentary deposi-
tion that I should be Patriarch after him, for I was a
very servant working before him, and I have trodden
all Persia on his missions." The Catholicus saith to him,
"It is true that thou hast travelled in obedience to him,
but I was reared upon his holy knees. He it was who
made me wise in holy doctrine, and he it was also
who made me Metropolitan of the country of his
fathers, and I have laid my hands upon his eyes, as
Joseph laid his hands upon those of his father Jacob.3
If thou hast worked before him he hath rewarded thee
by making thee Metropolitan of the high place of the
world, Şóbhâ; this should be sufficient for thee and
it is twice as much as thou hast deserved. For what
merits which thou possessest could he have given thee
the patriarchate? Or was it, peradventure that when
thou didst find that we were humble, even as we are
commanded to be, thou didst wish to magnify thyself
against us, like the company of Ķurâḥ (Korah) and
* Ctesiphon and Seleucia.
• We should perhaps add the word
3 Genesis xlvi. 29.
here. See p. 82. 1. 13.
* I. e., Nisibis.
aa
<pb n="186"/>Dâthan against Moses?' Know, however, that whilst*
we have acted according to the command of our Lord
and of the fathers, thou by this pride which thy piety
has shown, hast proved thyself to be in opposition to
it. May God³ the Lord forgive us all, Amen." Thus
by his humility Mår George reconciled George the
Metropolitan, and he bound on the crown of victory,
and the happiness which is reserved for the humble
is reserved for him in heaven. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="85"/> All these
things, O beloved Mår 'Abhd-isho, I have learned from
the ecclesiastical histories of the saintly Mår Athķen,*
who was called "Plucker out of his beard," of the
Great Monastery [of Mount Izlå].
CHAPTER XIV. 5
OF ANOTHER GEORGE [METROPOLITAN] OF PERÂTH DHĚ
MAISHAN, WHO WAS ALSO ANGRY AND WISHED TO LIFT UP
THE HEEL AGAINST MÂR CATHOLICUS.
That holy men should live in afflictions, and that
Satan would never let them have peace, but would, at
* Numbers xvi. 1-35. George means "Nay, we think
rather that when thou didst find that we were humble thou
didst wish" etc.
2 Strike out pa.
3 Read 2010.
* See also chaps. 16 and 29. Mâr Athķen was originally a
monk at Mount Ìzlâ, but he ended his days in the Monastery of Mar
Aphni-Mâran. Besides the Ecclesiastical Histories here mentioned
he wrote "a Disputation [addressed to] a wise brother," several
letters, a Treatise on the monastic life, etc. See B. O., i. I,
p. 217.
5 Parts of this chapter are quoted in B. O., iii. 1, pp. 145,150.
<pb n="187"/>
every moment, be working all manner of grievous
troubles for them, and disquieting the meek, and stirring
up temptations for them, the adorable mouth of our
Vivifier foretold, saying, “In the world ye shall have
tribulation," and again, "If they have persecuted me,
you also will they persecute." What then? As soon
as George of Nisibis had been reconciled, and Satan
saw the profound humility which the Catholicus had
manifested in respect of him, and the long road of
trouble and afflictions which he had borne, he could
not endure to leave that blessed man without other
pain and anxiety even for a short time. Now when
the Catholicus went down to Mědhinâthâ dhě Bêth
Armâyê, he heard and learned also concerning George
of Pěrâth dhě Maishân, how he was bringing accu-
sations against him before the heathen, and also that
he was making ready to offer resistance to him. And
although this also made trouble for him, he went down
to make peace, and to make of none effect the crafts
of the Calumniator. Now when he arrived at [Pĕrâth
dhe Maishân], George left that place and departed to
'Akôlė. And since that holy man [George] was armed
with humility against all Satanic assaults, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="86"/> he
I went to take refuge with the spiritual man, Rabban
* St. John xvi. 33.
3 See supra, p. 181.
• St. John xv. 20.
* ABC have and Vat. has, which Assemânî
(B. O., iii, 1, p. 150, col. 2) transcribes Nä. Hoffmann
would read on. The town Dans, Jalall is apa,
al-Kufâ, a city about thirty five miles south of Babylon, ten
east of Meshed 'Ali, and twenty-four from the Euphrates. See
Yahût iii, pp. 322-326.
<pb n="188"/>Khodhâhwai, the head of the Monastery of Beth Ḥâlê,*
a man who strove to live the life of Antony [the Great]
and of Macarius, a holy man in truth, and a praiseworthy.
And that holy man served the will of Mar Catholicus
with ready mind and with all the obedience with which
it was seemly to act before the head of the Church; and
thus through the instrumentality of Rabban Khodhâhwai,
and through the humility of Mar Catholicus, that George
also was reconciled.
And after these things Mår Catholicus went down
to Bêth Ķeṭrâyê' that he might reconcile the in-
habitants thereof, for they had cut themselves off from
obedience³ to the episcopal throne of Rêw-Ardashîr,*
which is Persia; and he went to the island of Dîrên,"
and the people thereof were also reconciled. And he
went up from there, and came to this holy monastery,
and he brought with him cloths for the altar which
had been woven for him in the island of Dîrên, of
Beth Ketrayê. And he entreated the wise and holy
* See supra, p. 102, note 7.
" The inhabitants of Katar 15 on the east coast of Arabia,
along the Persian Gulf, opposite Baḥrên. See Hoffmann, Aus-
züge, p. 114f. We should probably read 23.
3 See the letters of Mår sho'-yahbh on pp. 154-174.
4 Read Rêw-Ardashîr, or Rêv-Ardeshêr, later
Rêshahr. This town was situated on the river Tåb, on the
frontier between Pêrsistân, and Khûzistân, and is to be distin-
guished from Rîshahr, near Abûshehr (Bushire) on the Persian
Gulf. The residence of the Archbishop of Persia was at Rew-
Ardashîr. See Nöldeke, Geschichte der Perser, p. 19, note 4-
5 A place on the chief island of Bahrên in the Persian Gulf.
It is the 15 of Yâķût, i, p. 537. See also Nöldeke, Ge-
schichte der Perser, p. 57, note 2.
<pb n="189"/>
father 'Anân-lsho' that he would collect the chapters and
questions which were scattered about in a confused
manner and were sown mixedly through the various
sections of the [Book] of the histories, and narratives,
and triumphs, and the questions and answers of the
ascetic fathers,-now this book was called the "Con-
versations of the Elders" -and that he would make
each question follow that to which it belonged in con-
secutive order.
CHAPTER XV. 
OF THE COMPILATION OF THE BOOK WHICH WAS CALLED
"PARADISE."
Now this Abba 'Anân-Isho', (may his memory be
for all blessings),³ who was mentioned a little way back,
was a contemporary' of both these Patriarchs who
were anointed with oil,' and to both he showed his
obedience; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="87"/> to Mâr Åshö-yahbh in arranging the
Canons of the Ḥudhrâ,' and to Mâr George in ar-
ranging the Book of the Fathers, which work he under-
took to do." And having asked for the prayers of
Mår Catholicus, and of the holy old men of his con-
* See B. O., iii. 1, p. 49.
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 145.
3 See Wright, Syr. Lit., p. 843, note 19.
ܒܕܒܪ ܒܬܐ Read
5 Literally "sons of oil." Assemânî has (col. 2, 1. 37).
6 7. e., the service book for the whole year.
7 This refers to the words, "And he entreated the wise and
holy father," etc.
<pb n="190"/>gregation, he began and finished this command [with]
which he had been commanded. And with an enlightened
mind, and a wise understanding-especially as the Spirit
had manifested in him the efficacy of His gift,-he
arranged and fitted together in smooth order, six hundred
chapters, [divided] into fifteen Canons, each containing
forty sections.* Each chapter was [followed by a]
question having direct reference' to the contents of
the chapter which it followed, (so that if a brother was
labouring in any spiritual warfare whatsoever, and
wished to pluck consolation or to take counsel on the
matter which vexed him, he might find it ready close
at hand; and the counsels were placed in consecutive
order so that he might be very quickly consoled in
his affliction and relieved, and also that he might lay³
soothing plaster* on his suffering wound), and four
hundred and thirty other chapters, which treat generally
of all kinds of excellence, and many others to which
he did not affix numbers nor did he arrange them in
order. And he took from the Commentary on the
blessed Matthew the Evangelist, the Discourse which
was composed by Mår John Chrysostom on the praises
* Reading, with Hoffmann, i. e. 15×40.
Assemânî has "Divisit autem universum opus in sexcenta et
quindecim capitula, quatuordecim canonibus et distinctionibus
comprehensa." (B. O., iii. I, p. 145, col. 2). .
Read "asking".
3 Read with Vat..
.uiarua — ܡܠܓܡ ܀
The book contained then six hundred chapters on specific
points, divided into fifteen books of forty sections each, four
hundred and thirty chapters on general matters, and a large
number of chapters on miscellaneous subjects.
6 Born at Antioch, A. D. 347, died 407.
<pb n="191"/>
of the Egyptian ascetics,' and the Questions of the
blessed Mar Abraham' of Nephthar, and other examples
and narratives which he himself had collected from the
writings of the Fathers. And he arranged the whole
work in two volumes; in the first part were the histories
of the holy Fathers composed by Palladius³ and Jerome,*
* This Discourse or Encomium is extant in Syriac in Brit.
Mus. MS. Add. 17,174 (Wright, Catalogue, p. 1075, col. 2).
ܩܘܠܣܐ ܕܕܝܪ̈ܝܐ ܕܡܨܪܝܢ ܡܢ ܤܐܡܪܐ ܕܬܡܢܝܐ ܕܦܘܫܩܐ ܕܡܬܝ The title reads
.ܐܘܢܓܠܝܤܛܐ ܕܥܒܝܕ ܠܡܪܝ ܝܘܐܢܝܣ ܐܦܝܣܩܘܦܐ ܕܩܘܣܛܢܛܝܢܘܦܘܠܝܣ
• Abraham is always called, or by the Nes-
torians (see B. O., iii. 1, p. 191, note 1), and is by the
Monophysites (see B. O., 1, p. 463, note 1; Wright, Catalogue,
The Nestorians derive the word from the
p. 774, col. 1).
district called
✗), in the province of Kashkâr (200 L
madrop for all No, Payne Smith, Thes., col. 2430), but Hoff-
mann is inclined to refer it to Népeap, 2 Maccabees i. 36, where
there was a place of sacred fire, although he thinks it quite possible
that Niffer was really the birthplace of Abraham, and that he
may have identified his town with Nephthar, through a mystic
fancy. According to 'Abhd-isho' he wrote "various compo-
sitions," and a work on the monastic life. See B. O., iii. 1,
p. 191, and 1, pp. 463, 464; Wright, Catalogue Syr. MSS.,
p. 10756.
3 Palladius the great friend of Chrysostom was born about
A. D. 367. He embraced the ascetic life about 387, was made
Bishop of Hellenopolis after 391, and took refuge in Rome from
the persecution in 405. He visited several places in Palestine,
and travelled in Egypt from Alexandria to Aswân in search
of material for his history of the Egyptian ascetics, and was
the friend of a large number of the most famous of them. The
Paradise or Lausiac History of Palladius is thought to have
been composed between the years 414 and 420. See Tille-
mont, Mémoires, viii, pp. 272,359; Cotelerius, Monumenta, iii,
563; Assemânî, B. O., iii. I, p. 49, note 1.
He died A. D. 420. According to the Catalogue of
<pb n="192"/>and in the second part were the questions and the
narratives of the fathers which he himself had brought
together. And he called this book "Paradise", <pb type="textAllignment"  n="88"/>
and thus it is handed down and received in all the
monasteries of the East, and the fathers everywhere
praise his ability and applaud his work. And being
inflamed by love for him I have written down his
honourable memorial among the histories of the holy
men who were his fellow workers and associates.
THE SYRIAC VERSION OF THE PARADISE OF PALLADIUS.
During the winter of 1888 the Vicar of the Chaldean
Patriarch was so kind as to show me some of the Syriac
Manuscripts in his possession, and among them was a thick
'Abhd-Îsho' (B. O., iii. I, p. 49) Palladius and Jerome al
,1 ,.0 .See B ܂ܟܬܒܐ ܕܦܪܕܝܣܐ ܘܡܡܠܠܐ ܕܤܦܐ ܥܡ ܡܠܟܐ ܡܬܠܬ ܦܢܩܝܬܐ ܚܪܝܙܝܢ
pp. 568,608.
* The "Paradise" of Palladius contained the lives of the
western ascetics, and the "Paradise" of Joseph Ḥûzâyâ con-
tained the lives of the eastern ascetics (B. O., iii. 1, p. 102,
col. 2); both are to be distinguished from the "Paradise of
Eden" by 'Abhd-] sho', Metropolitan of Nisibis, (B. O., iii. I,
p. 325), and the "Little Paradise" by David, Bishop of Kartaw.
See infra Bk. II. chap. 24. For the account of the Syriac
version of the Paradise of Palladius and Saint Jerome, and the
Questions of Abraham of Nephthar, which is believed to be
the redaction made by 'Anan-Ishô' see pp. 192-206: A portion
of this same version appears to be preserved in Brit. Mus.
Add. 17,263 (Wright, Catalogue, p. 1079, No. DCCCCXXXI);
but Add. 17,264 (Wright, Catalogue, p. 1078, No. DCCCCXXX)
is probably the work of Gabriel of Katar. See Wright, Syr.
Lit., p. 843, note 19.
<pb n="193"/>
volume containing the Lives of Holy Men by Palladius; now
the Syriac copies of the work of Palladius differ as much from
one another as the Greek, and as the copy which I was then
examining was old and complete, and was, moreover, different
from any version of the work of Palladius then known to me,
I asked to be allowed to have a copy of it made by a trust-
worthy scribe; the permission was most kindly given and the
copy was made. Subsequent investigations and enquiries made
in and around Môşul proved that this version was believed to
be the redaction of the great work of Palladius made by 'Anân-
sho at the request of George the Patriarch. In the first
volume of his Bibliotheca Orientalis, (p. 608) Assemâni des-
cribes a somewhat similar copy, but as frequent reference to
this redaction, although not actually mentioned by name,
made by Thomas of Margå in his Monastic History, and as
some important extracts from it are made in this edition the
following complete description of the copy made at Mosul may
be useful to students and others.
This manuscript consists of 353 paper leaves measuring 13%,
in. by 9. Each page is occupied by one column of writing,
generally containing 28 lines. The quires are thirty-six in
number, and are signed with letters. The volume is written
in a fine, bold Nestorian hand with numerous vowel points.
The colophon fol. 352a runs: a mbat ander
:
ܪܕܬܒ ܠܘܬ ܠܘܩܐ ܓܪܦܣܝܛܐ )rparésiros Toü xotravor«. ܘܠܐܠܗܐ ܫܘܒܐ
apple
"Here end the histories and triumphs of the holy fathers
[and] solitaries which were composed by the holy and excellent
Mår Palladius, Bishop of Hellenopolis, which he wrote for
For a description of the contents of Syriac MSS. of the Lives of the
Solitary Brethren by Palladius in the British Museum see Wright, Catalogue,
pp. 1070-1078; the "Illustrations of the Book of the Paradise" (op. cit.
p. 1078ff.) by "a native of Katar" is a different work. See Wright, Syriac
Literature (in the Encyclopaedia Britannica, 9th edit., p. 843, note 19.).
2 Read. The original name of this town was Apendin,
but was changed to 'Eλnvonolic because Helena, the mother of Constantine,
I was born there.
bb
<pb n="194"/>Lôşa (Lausus) the chamberlain [of the Emperor Theodosius];
to God be glory and honour and praise and worship and
exaltation, for ever and ever; Yea and Amen."
The book was finished on the sixth day of the latter Teshrin,
in the year of the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ 1890, in the
blessed village of Alkosh, the village of Nahum the Prophet
which is laid and built by the side of the Monastery of Rabban
Hôrmîzd the Persian, in the days of the Catholicus and Patriarch
of Babylon of the East, Mr Eliya XlII, and was written by
'lsa bar-Eshaya, the son of the deacon Cyriacus from the vil-
lage of Ekror.
The title nuns:— "By ܒܨܠܘܬܗܘܢ ܕܟܒܪ ܢܬܚܢ ܩܕܡ ܒܝܡ ܕܡܢܝܚܐ ܡܪܢ ܐܡܝܕ ܀
the might of our Lord Jesus Christ we begin to write the Book
of the Histories and Triumphs of the holy fathers [who were]
solitary monks of the desert, and who hated this world and all
that therein is, which was composed by the holy and excellent
Mår Palladius, Bishop of Hellenopolis, and which he wrote for
ܥܠ ܚܝܠܗ ܕܡܪܢ ܝܫܘܥܡܫܝܚܐ ܡܫܟܝܢܢ ܠܡܟܬܒ ".the chamberlain Lausus
-: The work contains ܠܘܬ ܠܘܣܐ ܦܪܦܣܝܬܐ܀
I. Fol. 16. The history of the life of Antony by Athana-
sius, Archbishop of Alexandria.
<pb n="195"/>
II. Part I. Foll. 416-109a. Histories of the solitary
ܬܘܒ .brethren of the desert from the Paradise of Palladius
a The letter of Palladius to Lausus the chamberlain who
asked him to write an account of the lives of the solitary monks
ܐܓܪܬܐ ܕܦܠܟܝܣ ܐܦܣܩܘܦܐ ܕܗܠܢܦܘܠܝܣ ܡܕܝܪܬܐ. ܕܥܒܕܪ ܠܘܬ .of the desert
ܦܠܕܝܣ ܐܦܣܩܘܦܐ ܠܠܘܣܐ ܢܪܦܣܝܬܐ ܫܠܡ܀
ܢܦܠܘ.
<pb n="196"/>ܠܟ ܓܝܪ ܐܠܗܐ ܗܝ ܕܐܡܝܢܐܝܬ ܬܗܘܐ ܪܕܦ ܒܬܪ ܝܕܥܬܗ ܕܡܫܝܚܐ ܐ .416 .See fol
The scope of the Book.
ܘܠܕܘܒܪܐ ܪܩܚܢܝܐ ܠܐ ܐܫܪܘܝܬ. ܕܚܠܬ ܡܢ ܪܒܘܬܗ ܕܦܘܩܕܢܐ ܕܥܒܪ ܠܡܘܚܬܐ ܕܝܠܝ.
ܥܠܝ ܚܟܡܬܐ ܕܡܢ ܠܒܪ. ܘܥܠ ܣܘܟܠܐ ܪ̈ܘܚܢܝܐ. ܒܪܡ ܕܝܢ ܟܕ ܡܬܪܚܟ ܐܢܐ ܩܕܚܝܬ.
<pb n="197"/>
ܕܗܕܘ ܠܚܤ ܚܕ ܡܗܘܢ. ܩܠܝܠ ܘܛܒ ܙܢܘܪ ܣܤ ܐܘܣܦܬ ܥܠ ܣܓܝܐܐ ܡܗܘܢ. ܐܦ
ܚܠܡܐ ܕܠܘܬܗ e Counsels to Laus
1 The beginning of the Histories. Of Abbȧ
See fol. 42a
See fol. 436
See fol. 476
ܫܘܪܝܐ ܕܝܠܗܝܢ ܕܟܫܝܬܐܘ ܕܟܠ ܢܝܣܕܪܪܐ .Isidore
See fol. 48a ܕܪܕܥܐܪܣ ܕܡܢ ܕܒܝܣ .Of Dorotheos of Thebes 2
See fol. 5oa : ܒܬܘܠܬܐ ܚܕܐ ܥܠܝܚܬ .Of a certain young virgin 3
ܬܘ ܥܠ ܕܝܕܡܘܣ Of Didymus ܀
See fol. 506
5 Of Alexandra of Alexandria. busad sus
See fol. 516
6 Of Abbá Macarius and the virgin.
See fol. 524
7 Of the Monks of Mount Netirá (Nitria). Asp
See fol. 53a
ܕܥܠ ܐܢܐ ܐܡܪܢ .Of Abbi Ammon 8
ܕܥܠ ܛܘܒܢܐ ܐܪܪ .Of the blessed Or 9
ܕܥܠ ܛܘܒܢܐ ܪܢܒܘ .1o Of the blessed Pambo
See fol. 54a
See fol. 556
See fol. 556
<pb n="198"/>11 Of the blessed Ammonius, the disciple of
12 Of Benjamin of Mount Netirà (Nitria)
See fol. 566
ܕܥܠ ܛܘܒܢܐ ܐܡܪܢܝܣ Pambo
ܐܢܠܘܢܝܣ .Of Apollonius the Merchant 13
ܐܚܐ ܟܝܢ̈ܝܐ .Of the brethren Paesius and Isaiah 14
See fol. 576
See fol. 586
See fol. 586
15 Of Macarius the child of the Cross.
ܛܠܐ ܕܠܝܩ
See fol. 596
ܢܐܣܝܣ ܘܐܫܥܝܐ
ܩܡ ܒܓܘܢܝܐ ܕܩܠܝܬܗ. ܘܦܫܛ ܐܝܕܪܗܝ ܒܨܠܘܬܐ. ܘܟܕ
ܐܬܐ ܘܚܙܐ ܕܩܐܡ ܥܠ ܓܢܒ ܐܣܬܐ. ܘܦܫܝܛܢ ܐܝܕܘܗܝ. ܩܡ
ܘܗܟܢ ܚܢܪܢ ܩܒܪܗ ܒܕܡܘܬ ܕܨܠܝܒܐ ܘܣܡܢܝܗܝ܀
16 Of the blessed Nathaniel. S
17 Of Macarius the Egyptian, the disciple of
ܒܩܪܝܣ ܡܨܪܝܐ ܬܠܡܝܗ ܕܡܪܝ ܐܡ .Mar Antony
ܐܢܛܘܢܝܣ
See fol. 606
See fol. 616
18 Of Macarius of Alexandria.
See fol. 64a
19 Of Paul, the disciple of Abba Antony.
See fol. 686
20 Of Pachomius of Scete.
See fol. 71a
See fol. 72a
ܐܤܛܦܬܐ ܐܢܩ ܕܐܝܬܘܗܝ Of Stephen, the African 21
See fol. 73a ܘܠܝܣ ܦܠܝܣܛܝܢܝܐ .Of Valens, the Palestinian 22
See fol 74a
See fol. 75
23 Of Aaron, the Alexandrian.
ܦܛܠܡܐܘܣ OfPtolemy, the Egyptian, of Scete 24
ܡܨܪܝܐ ܞܘ ܕܣܩܝܛܝܣ
See fol. 75 a ܥܠ ܐܒܪܗܡ ܐܓܒܛܝܐ .Of Abraham the Egyptian 25
See fol. 756
26 Of a virgin of Jerusalem.
<pb n="199"/>
27 Of a virgin of Caesaraca.
28 Of a virgin who fell, and repented.
29 Of another virgin who fell and repented.
ܛܣܐ .Of the blessed woman Tehesiyá 30
31 Of Elijah, who built a convent for nuns
near Thebes.
32 Of Dorotheus, who succeeded Elijah in the
care of this convent
33 Of Pachomius the Great, and of the monks
and nuns at Thebes.
34 Of the virgin at Alexandria who hid Atha-
nasius.
199
See fol. 756
See fol. 76a
See fol. 766
See fol. 77b
See fol. 794
See fol. 80a
See fol. 80a
See fol. 83a
ܟܕ ܗܟܝܠ ܐܬܢܟܠܘ ܒܙܒܢ ܐܪܝܢܘ ܥܠ ܛܘܒܬܐ ܐܬܢܣܝܣ
ܐܫܢܣܝܣ
.ܕܐܚܪܢ Of the virgin 35
l of Antinotܣܢܛܝܠܝܪܐ Of the blessed woman 36
See fol. 84a
See fol. 846
37 Of the virgin
See fol. 846
.ܣܘܠܬܐܘܣ Of the Virgin 38
See fol. 85a
who for her ܪܓܤܛܠܝܢܘܣ Of a virgin and of 39
sake fought with beasts.
40 Of the holy Melania,
41 Of the blessed Melania the younger.
See fol. 856
, the elder.
See fol. 86b
See fol. 89a
.ܐܠܘܡܦܝܪܐ Of Olympias 42
ܩܚܕܪܐ Of Candida 43
See fol. 906
See fol. 92 a
<pb n="200"/>44 Of Gelasia.
45 Of Juliana
See fol. 926
See fol. 926
wppy ka kun
ܚܠ̈ܦܐ. ܩܒܠ ܘܣܬܪܬܗ ܬܪ̈ܬܝܢ ܫܢܝܢ. ܟܕ ܡܬܪܣܝܐ ܠܗ
·
46 Of by and his wife.
See fol 926
47 Of the blessed woman
See fol. 934
48 Of a monk of Ancyra.
See fol. 936
49 Of John of Lycus in the Thebaid
50 Of Poseidon
.ܡܕܝܢܬܐ ܕܬܒܐܝܣ
عة هيجية
ܣܪܢܝܘܣܕܡ ܘܒ ܰOf :5
See fol. 946
See fol. 966
See fol. 97 b
52 Of James the lame, an acquaintance of
Antony.
See fol. 98a
53 Of Diocles, the grammarian and
philosopher.
See fol. 100 a
54 Of Cophiton,, who lived four miles
from Antinoë.
See fol. 1006
55 Of a monk who fell.
See fol. 1006
56 Of Ephraim, a deacon of the Church of
Edessa.
See fol. 101 a
57 Of Innocent?
ܐܝܢܘܩܛܝܘܣ
(sic)
See fol. 1016
58 Of Elpidius
who lived in the caves
of Jericho.
See fol. 1026
59 Of Eustathius
brother of Elpidius.
See fol. 103a
60 Of Sisinnes,
disciple of Elpidius.
See fol. 103a
61 Of Gaddaeus the Palestinian
See fol. 1036
62 Of Elijah.
See fol. 1036
.from Jericho ܣܒܢ ܒܪ ܥܠܡܐ Of 63
See fol. 104a
64 Of Serapion dhé Sedona Apps (450.
See fol. 104a
65 The triumph of Eulogius.
See fol. 107 a
ܦܓܪܗ ܡܛܠ ܡܫܚܐ܀ܐ
<pb n="201"/>
II. Part. II. Foll. 109a-197 b. Histories of the solitary
brethren, composed by Palladius.
balls on
emples as nosas
1 The triumph of the blessed Mark the
anchorite.
2 The history of Mår Paul the chief of the
anchorites of the desert.
3 The triumph of a youth of Alexandria.
4 The triumph of the disciple of an old man
at Scete.
5 'The triumph of the disciple of another
old man.
See fol 109a
See fol. 1096
See fol. 1136
See fol. 1166
See fol. 1186
6 The triumph of the disciple of an old man
of the desert.
See fol. 1186
7 The triumph of Peter, the disciple of one
of the old men.
See fol. 1196
8 The triumph of a disciple of one of the
old men
See fol. 1196
9 Of Aurelius of Tarsus.
See fol. 120a
10 Of Abbá Moses, the Judian, the servant of
Ptolemy.
See fol. 1206
11 Of Abbá Peor b the Egyptian.
See fol. 122a
See fol. 122b
See fol. 123a
12 Of Abbá Moses the Libyan.
13 Of a certain wanderer,
14 The History of the blessed Evagrius of
Pontus, whose father was a A, and
who was appointed 'reader' by Basil, Bishop
of Caesaraea. Evagrius went to the synod
at Constantinople with Gregory Nazianzenus. See fol. 1246
Hop of 2009 AGO
potom
op 007 Lamp
* 2007 200 2007
15 The history of Mark the monk, from
near Antioch.
1 Numbered in the MS.
See fol. 1266
CC
<pb n="202"/>16 Of Abba Bessarion
See fol. 1316
17 Of the miracles which Abba Bessarion
wrought.
See fol. 1326
18 The history of one of the holy men.
See fol. 1336
19 Of Abba Mark the disciple of Abba Syl-
vanus.
20 Of Abba Paul, the disciple of Mår Antony. See fol. 1354
21 The 'AσкηTIкóv of Pachomius.
sax spons
See fol. 1366
See fol. 135a
ܠܟܘܡ ܕܝܪܝܐ ܛܒܢܣܝܘܛܐ. ܐܣܩܛܝܩܝܢ ܕܡܬܦܤܐ ܬܫܥܝܬܐ
dost pop
22 Of Sylvanus the actor
23 Of the funeral of a sinner.
24 Of the funeral of a holy man.
25 Of the things which he heard spoken in the
air by devils as he was going to his mon-
astery in the desert.
See fol. 138a
See fol. 1396
See fol. 1406
See fol. 141a
26 Of the things which he wrought when he
arrived at his monastery.
See fol. 1416
27 Of the revelation which he received from
God concerning heretics.
See fol. 1426
28 Of the revelation which he received con-
cerning the ordering
of the
See fol 1434
See fol. 1444
brethren.
28 Of another revelation.
29 Of the words of doctrine which he spake
when the brethren were assembled.
30 How, even in the time of famine, he would
not take corn for nothing.
31 How he refused to take the full value for
work of the brethren when sold.
32 Of a certain monk who lived in the mon-
astery.
33 Of the phantasm which Pachomius
and Theodore saw when they were journ.
eying in the desert.
See fol. 1446
See fol. 1464
See fol. 147a
See fol. 1476
See fol. 1426
34 Of the gift of tongues which Pachomius
received.
See fol. 1516
<pb n="203"/>
35 Of Yawnan, a gardener in one of the mon-
asteries.
36 Of how he would not have beautiful build-
ings.
37 Of how he would not allow the heretics
who once came to him to experience the
working of miracles at his hands as they
desired.
See fol. 152a
See fol. 1536
See fol 1544
38 The question of a monk, and the answer
of Pachomius.
See fol. 1546
39 Of how he despised the man who laboured
for vain glory.
See fol 1554
40 Of a certain holy monk of the monastery See fol. 1556
(app
41 Of Palladius the writer
ܒܝܬ ܢܣܘܡ܀
See fol. 1566
III. Foll. 157a-197a. The histories of the solitary brethren
of the Egyptian desert written by Hieronymus
1 The author's apology.
2 The triumphs of Mår John, the prophet of
Lycus in the Thebaid.
See fol. 157
See fol. 1594
3 The triumphs of the holy Abbá Ór.
See fol. 167 b
4 The triumphs of Abbá Ammon.
See fol. 1694
5 The triumphs of Abba Abban.
See fol. 169a
6 The history of the lives of the brethren
in
Oxyrhynchus (?)
See fol. 1696
7 The triumphs of Abba Theon.
See fol. 1704
9 The triumph of the blessed Apollo.
8 The triumphs of Abba Elijah.
10 The triumphs of Abbá Apelles
11 The triumphs of another Apollo and John
of the desert.
12 The triumphs of Abbá Paphnutius.
13 The triumphs of Eulogius.
14 The triumphs of Isidore.
15 The triumphs of Abbass and See fol. 186a
See fol. 1706
See fol. 1714
See fol. 1796
See fol. 181 a
See fol. 1826
See fol. 185a
See fol. 1856
<pb n="204"/>16 The triumphs of Isaiah, and Paul, and Noph
the confessors with Abbâ Ôr.
17 The triumphs of Evagrius.
18 The triumphs of Abbas.
See fol. 191 a
See fol. 1916
See fol. 192a
19 The triumphs of the blessed fathers who
worked miracles.
See fol. 1926
20 The general triumph of the brethren in the
.ܢܛܝܪܘܣ Nitian desert
21 The triumphs of Ammon of Nitria.
22 The triumphs of another Ammon.
See fol. 1936
See fol. 194a
See fol. 1946
23 The triumphs of Didymus, of, and
of three brethren.
See fol. 195 a
24 The triumphs of Philemon, of John, and
of Serapion.
25 The triumphs of Apollo the Martyr.
See fol. 1956
See fol. 196a
IV. Foll. 1976-3506. The Counsels of the holy old men,
and the questions and answers of the brethren. Sp
* was izg
I Questions 1-62. On fleeing from men, on the solitary
life, and on dwelling in the cell continually, compiled by
Palladius. See foll. 1976-205 a.
-This section con .ܘܐܡܝܢܘܬܐ ܕܒܠܝܬܐ ܕܡܟܬܒ ܠܦܠܟܝܣ ܐܦܣܩܘܦܐ܀
tains questions, etc., by Arsenius, Ammon, Sisoes
Sarmâța A, Antony, Theodore, Betimiôn
Joseph, Nestor, Poemen, most, Bishop of Oxyrhynchus,
Macarius, Alonius, Pambo, Abbà John, Abbà Agathon,
Abba Moses, and many others whose names are not
mentioned.
2 Questions 63-103. On fasting and abstinence. See
ܬܘܒ ܥܠ ܨܘܡܐ ܘܢܙܝܪܘܬܐ ܘܫܪܟܐ ܕܥܩܠܐ ܐܚܪ̈ܢܐ܀ .296-foll. 205a
Sayings, etc., of Paphnutius, Macarius, Isaac, John, Sisoes,
Abraham, Agathon, Theodotus, Paphnutius, Serenus,
Poemen, Sylvanus, Daniel, Benjamin, and others whose
names are not mentioned.
3 Questions 104-134. On reading the Scriptures, night
vigils, the singing of the Psalms and continual prayer.
<pb n="205"/>
See foll. 2096-2136.
2 15ome Shop his son
,Sayings, etc., by Arsenius ܟܬܒܐ ܕܡܙܡܘܪܐ ܘܨܠܠܬܐ ܐܡܝܪܐ ܀
Pachomius, Joseph, Sisoes, Isaiah, Poemen, Epiphanius,
Antony, John, Daniel.
4 Questions 135-156. On weeping for our sins. See
ܬܘܒ ܥܠ ܗ̇ܝ ܕܝܟܬ ܙܕܩ ܠܢ ܕܢܒܤܐ ܥܠ ܚܛܗܝܢ .2156-2136 .foll
Neto JOHNS Sayings, etc., by Ammon, Poemen, Sisoes,
Paul, Theodore, Macarius, Arsenius, Noah, and
others.
5 Questions 157-181. On self-denial. See foll. 2156-2186.
Sayings, etc., by Arsenius, Philagrius,
Serapion, Theodore, Isaac, Agathon, Poemen
*
and others.
6 Questions 185-235. On patience. See foll. 2186-226a.
* Sayings etc., by Agathon, Macarius, John,
Paul, Antony, Theodore, Chaeremon, la, Arsenius,
Poemen, Isidore, Moses, Paesius the brother of Poemen,
and others.
7 Questions 236-245. On submission to God, and to our
parents and brethren. See foll. 226 a-228b.
s
* po mēs nodo je Sayings, etc., by John, Joseph,
Sylvanus, Daniel, Pambo, and others.
8 Questions 246-386. On exceeding watchfulness in our
thoughts, words, and deeds. See foll. 2286-2476. S
Sayings, etc., by
*
Arsenius, Ammon, Hôr, Paphnutius, Sisoes, Joseph, Poemen,
Theodore, Paesius, Antony, Lot, Isaac, Daniel,
John, Or, Eulogius, Pambo, Macarius, Lîktâ, Paul, Epi-
phanius, Eugenia, Agathon, Hyparchus, Pachomius, Alo-
nius, and others.
9 Questions 387-435. On love, and charity and the re-
ceiving of strangers. See foll. 2476-2556.
ܥܠ ܚܘܬ
,Sayings, etc., by Lot, Joseph ܘܡܪܚܡܢܘܬܐ ܘܩܘܒܠܐ ܕܐܟܣܢܝܐ ܀
Philip, Ammon, Macarius, Antony, Theodore, Poemen,
Sisoes, Akhilâ, Zeno, and others.
10 Questions 436-547. On humility. See foll. 256a-269a.
Jak
to Now sa taxspo tras s
<pb n="206"/>writers.
Sayings, etc., chiefly by the above mentioned.
II Questions 548-586. On fornication. See foll. 269a-275a.
Sayings, etc., by Isidore, Daniel, Isaac, Poemen,
John, Zeno, Theodore, and other writers.
12 Questions 587-722 (fol. 295 a); 101-400. See foll
275a-3336. Of the acceptance of repentance.
ܥܠ
,.Sayings, etc ܕܡܬܩܒܠܐ ܬܝܒܘܬܐ ܘܕܐܝܟܢܐ ܙܕܩ ܠܢ ܕܢܬܘܒ ܩܪܪܐ܀
chiefly by the above mentioned writers. Some leaves
appear to have been wanting at fol. 295a in the manu-
script from which this copy was made.
13 Homilies against the idle and sluggish. See fol. 3336.
Updated
14 Homilies against those who love vain-glory. See fol. 3336.
* was Joos
15 Questions and answers of the holy fathers for teacher and
ܫܘܐܠܐ ܘܦܘܢܝ ܦܬܓܡܐ ܕܝܠܘܢܐ ܘܡܠܦܬܐ .3346 .pupil. See fol
واحالة مجد سجده
16 Admonition concerning the questions and answers, etc. See
fol. 339a. the pass
17 Sayings of the fathers which I have found in other books.
See fol. 341b. xip tip
(Numbered from :-).
up jaba
18 Questions and answers of the fathers. See fol. 3456.
19 Of humility and how a man should hold himself to be of
none account before all men. See fol. 3466.
20 Admonition of the holy fathers. See fol. 3486.
21 A second admonition. See fol. 3496.
22 Admonition of Abbå Mår John Chrysostom. See fol. 3506.
<pb n="207"/>
CHAPTER XVI.'
OF THE DEATH OF THE HOLY MAR GEORGE THE
CATHOLICUS.
According to what I have learned from the his-
tories of the Church, all of which I have written down
in this book,-now some are taken from written do-
cuments, and some from oral tradition,-and according
to what I have also found written in the Ecclesiastical
History of the excellent Mâr Athkên concerning Mâr
George the Catholicus, the king who reigned in his
and الحسن بن علی time was named Hasan bar Ali
that writer saith, "Hasan began to reign in the same
year³ in which George was appointed [Catholicus];
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 151, coll. 1. 2.
2 The text here appears to be corrupt, but I give what I
believe Thomas meant to say. Hoffmann would emend the
Aya No No more
ܐܝܟ ܡܐ ܕܝܠܦܬ ܡܢ ܟܫܥܝܐ ܥܕܬܚܝܬܐ :frst four lines of the chapter thus
Assemani reads “Sicut didici ex Ecclesiasticis ܓܝܘܪܓܝܣ ܩܬܘܠܝܩܐ.
was I was sup
historiis circa ea omnia, quae hic scribuntur, et alia quidem ex
codicibus, alia vero ex traditione, et historia Ecclesiastica excel-
lentis Mar Atken, hoc praeterea in historia de eodem Mar
Georgis Catholico scriptum reperio." (B. O., iii. 1, p. 153.)
3 Mâr Athķên is in error here. George succeeded Îshô-
yahbh A. D. 661 and sat till 680, but Ḥasan ibn-'Ali began to
reign A. H. 40 and died A. H. 49, when he was succeeded
by his younger brother Husên C, who died A. H. 61, or
about twenty-one years after Ḥasan began to reign. See Wright,
Syr. Lit., p. 843; Assemânî, B. O., iii. 1, p. 153, col. 2;
Annales quos scripsit At-Tabari, ed. de Goeje, ser. II, t. I,
pp. 1, 366; Ibn-el-Athiri, Chronicon, ed. Tornberg, t. iii. (A. H.
60-95), Leyden, 1876, p. 383 ff.
<pb n="208"/>and when George had ministered in the patriarchate
and Hasan had reigned twenty-two years, both died
in the same year, that is to say when each had ruled
twenty-two years. Now Mår George died in Ḥêrthâ,*
the city of the Arabs, and was buried with Mâr Abhâ,³
the Catholicus and Martyr, with all the honour which
befitteth the labours and afflictions with which he wearied
himself by sea and land for the sake of the holy Church
and the flocks which had been entrusted to his hands
by our Lord. And we may learn concerning the
depth of his doctrine and the height of his wisdom,
from the address of prayer which he composed, and
which begins:-
"O God, the Eternal, Who art from everlasting,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="89"/> "Thou Who art everlastingly the Good Being,
"Whose goodness never changeth. . . . ."4
1 Hoffmann would strike out pass pics?.
* A town, the ruins of which lie a little to the south-east
of the modern town of Meshed'Ali. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 97.
3 Mâr Abha was originally a Magian. He was baptized at
Hertha and he studied at Nisibis and Edessa. He was elected
Patriarch A. D. 536, and shortly after began to teach at
Seleucia. Owing to a dispute with Khusrau I. Anôshârwân
(531-579) he was banished to Âdhôrbâigån, but he returned
to Seleucia where he was thrown into prison by the king, and
died A. D. 552. His body was carried to Hertha and buried,
and the Nestorians style him Mâr Abhâ the Martyr. For a
list of his works see B. O., iii. 1, pp. 75-81. See also Bar-
Hebraeus, Chron. Eccles., ii. 89-95 and Wright, Syr. Lit.,
p. 836, col. 2.
* In pentasyllabic tripartite metre. The extract ends abruptly.
Hoffmann emends thus:-
| ܐܝܬܝܐ ܕܡܢ ܥܠܡ | ܗ̇ܘ ܕܡܬܘܡܐܝܬ | ܐܦ ܛܒܐ ܐܝܬܘܗܝ |
| ܐܦ ܡܢ ܛܒܘܬܗ | ܠܐ ܡܬܪܡ ܡܫܪܚܠܦ | ܘܐܝܟܢ ܫܘܚܠܦܐ |
<pb n="209"/>
And he composed for it mournful tunes which were to
be accompanied by beautifully arranged instrumental
music.
CHAPTER XVII.'
OF RABBAN SABHR-ISHO WHO WAS SURNAMED RÔSTÂM.*
This Rabban Sabhr-Isho' who was called Rosţâm,
the beloved friend of the holy fathers who lived in
this holy monastery, and the composer of histories of
them, came from Ḥěrem, a village of Adiabene. He
was a venerable and holy man, and from his youth
up had been a disciple in the Great Monastery of the
holy Rabban Már Narsai, the head of the monastery.
And when he had been there a short time, the fathers
who were there asked him, and he wrote [a tract] on
the occasion of the celebration of the Golden Sabbath³
Eve; he also wrote a lengthy work, in elegant language and
with a clear mind, which consisted partly of disputations
against heretics, and partly of arguments against ob-
scure opinions of various kinds. And he departed
from thence and came to our monastery, and when he
had tarried here also a short time, the monks from
the holy Monastery of Beth Kokâ' came after him, and
Assemânî, considering
to be no part of the metrical
composition, translates, "Quot in ea suavium Cantuum mutationes
cernere est, et quot pulcherrimo ordine succedentes sibi strophas
et modos!"
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 454, col. 2.
He flourished about A. D. 650.
3 I. e., "the first Sabbath eve after Pentecost."
tet shop. See Payne Smith, Thes., col. 2984.
* On the Great or Upper Zâb in Adiabene.
dd
<pb n="210"/>through their entreaties, and the counsel of the Elders
of this congregation [who gave it] for the benefit of
that holy monastery, he sorrowfully departed from
here. He wrote also another book in eight discourses
on the dispensation of our Lord, on the conversion of
the various countries by the hands of the blessed
Apostles, and on chastity and ascetic life. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="90"/> He
also composed at the request of the holy Elders who
were here, but especially of Abbâ Ķardâgh, who
occupied the same cell as Mâr Isho-yahbh [of Adiabene],
the history of Rabban Mâr Åshő-zěkhâ, of the Mon-
astery of Gassâ; the history of Mâr Isho-yahbh; the
history of Rabban Mår Abraham, the head of this
monastery, who came here from the monastery of
Rabban Zěkha-isho";" and of Rabban Ķâm-Isho. He
also composed the history of Mâr Abraham of Nephthar,*
of Rabban Mâr Job the Persian, and the history of
Rabban Sabhr-Isho' [the founder of the Monastery]³
of Beth Koka. Thus with the sweat of his toil in
the vineyard of Christ dropping from his brow, he
departed from this world, and his soul had rest.
to me when I saw in his writings the love with which
he burned for this holy house, it seemed good to make
pleasant this history with the venerable memorial of
his uprightness.
* See supra, pp. 83, 86.
See infra, p. 213.
And
3 The Abbot of Beth' bhê. * See supra, p. 191, note 2.
See B. O., . p. 418, col. 2; and Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 215,
note 1715.
6 He also wrote a history of the two brethren Joseph and
Abraham. See supra, p. 108, note 6.
<pb n="211"/>
CHAPTER XVIII.'
OF RABBAN GABRIEL, [THE HEAD OF THE MONASTERY], WHO
WAS SURNAMED THE "COw".
Among the chapters of this our history, ○ our friend
and master, Mår Abhd-Isho, we will also recount the
history of the venerable Gabriel, who was rapid in
thought and zealous for glorious deeds. This man
sprang up, according to the body, in the country of
Siârzôr, but it did not please him to remain in that
place like a savage deprived of the instruction of
doctrine, and he set out from thence and came to the
city of Nisibis, where he laboured and acquired the
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures. Now this man also
was a disciple in the Great Monastery of Mår Abraham
[on Mount Izla], and he toiled in the learning of many
books, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="91"/> and his mind was diligently trained in
controversy and in disputation against heresies. Espe-
cially, however, did he take up arms against the "shorn"
followers of Severus of Antioch who lived in the Mon-
astery of Ķarţămîn,³ and he had much controversy
with them, and [he composed] answers to them which
burned up the evil stubble of their hateful doctrine.
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, 456, col. 1.
2 We should strike out after pop.
I. e.,,apooûpa, a large tract of country in the
كورة واسعة في الجبال mountains between Arbela and Hamadan
.See Yaktii, p. 340f بين اربل و همذان
* They shaved the whole head; see supra, p. 40, note 4-
5 The app was founded before A. D. 500. See
Assemânî, Dissertatio de Monophysitis, B. O., ii. p. lxxiii. It
lay to the east of Mardin, in the district of Tûr 'Abhdîn, which
extended from Gezîret ibn 'Omar on the Tigris to Mardin. See
<pb n="212"/>And when Sâhdônå was driven out of the Church, he
went after him to Edessa, -as he himself testifies, say-
ing, "At that time, when the wretched Sâhdônâ was
expelled from the Church, I, Gabriel, blazed with the
burning zeal of my soul, and I went to Edessa to
him," and there he held a controversy with him, and
defeated him. And when the holy Mâr Narsai, the
head of that holy monastery, departed from this tem-
porary life to the life which endureth for everlasting,
this Gabriel composed the history' of his noble deeds,
at the end of which he wrote, "It is sufficient for me
to say in praise of Rabban Mâr Abraham and his
congregation, that the holy Rabban Jacob, the founder
of the monastery of Beth 'Abhê, went forth from it,
for the Lord hath built by his hands the king of mon-
asteries;" and from then until now this passage hath
been handed down in all places, and Bêth 'Âbhê is
called the "king of monasteries." Now he was head
of the monastery there for a short time, but he departed
from thence and came to this monastery. And when
Rabban Kâm-isho departed to his dwelling place, the
blessed Bĕrâz Sûrîn³ rose in his place; and when he
also departed, the blessed Mår Bar-Ṣâumâ-to whom
Mâr Hĕnân-Isho wrote a letter at the beginning of his
holding the office of Patriarch-rose in his place; and
when he also had completed his days, Rabban Gabriel
became the head of this holy monastery.' And he
Socin, Zur Geographie des Ţur 'Abhdîn, in Z.D.M.G. Band xxxv,
p. 259. For the word, i. e., NOTID b., Kouρoчμ see
Löw, Aram. Pflanzennamen, p. 218, no. 162.
.ܬ݂ܫܥܝܳܐ Read -
• See supra, p. 153.
3 He became Abbot under Ḥenân-Isho' I., who sat from
686-701.
<pb n="213"/>
composed a discourse on washing the feet, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="92"/>
which was read on the day of the Passover of our
Lord, and he wrote a history of the noble acts of the
holy martyrs of Țur Bera'in,' and narratives of various
kinds. Now that discourse which was referred to in
the commemoration of Rabban Jacob does not, strictly
speaking, belong to this Gabriel, but it was com-
posed by Már Gabriel, Metropolitan of Karkhå dhë
Bêth Sělôkh, who was called "Gabriel the Dancer," and
concerning whom we shall write when we come to his
place.³
CHAPTER XIX.4
OF RABBAN MAR ABRAHAM THE HEAD OF THE MONASTERY
OF RABBAN ZĚKHA-1SHỔ.3
Now although [the order of] the narratives of our
work is destroyed and they do not possess the chrono-
logical sequence which it was expected they should
possess, nevertheless according to my own opinion and
according to the historical tradition which I have re-
ceived from my fathers, I have preserved the order of
* For the Syriac text see Brit. Mus. Add. 12, 174 (Wright,
Catalogue, p. 1133), and for a German translation see Hoff-
mann, Auszüge, pp. 9-16. The martyrs A dhurparwa, Mihrnarsê
Â
and Mâhdukhti suffered in the ninth year of Sapor, King of
Persia.
+
⚫ Kerkûk.
3 See infra, Bk. ii. chap. 33.
Passages from this chapter are quoted in B. O., iii. 1,
p. 255, col. 2.
5 See supra, p. 24.
6 Read si.
<pb n="214"/>the times, and of those [who lived] in them. And even
if one person should be placed a little too late, and
another a little too early, this is not a matter for blame
and reproach, inasmuch as thy wisdom, O‘Abhd-isho,
man of enlightened mind, lover of holy histories, did
entreat me to go round the whole circle' of the ascetics
who have lived in this monastery and through all the
mass of their histories, and to bring them to light
before thee. Now it appears that the following account
of Rabban Mâr Abraham of Bêth Rabban Zekha-isho,
which we have omitted, belongs to the period of those
histories which have been related by us, although we
place it a little too late. And when Rabban Abraham
was an old man he came to this holy monastery on
account of the cold of the country of Dâsen,³ and on
his entrance here, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="93"/> by reason of his fame and
the exalted rigour of his ascetic life, this brotherhood
entrusted to him the headship of the monastery. And
he led those diligent sons in all the ways of a holy
life, and they made their perfection* reach to heaven,
and he wrought here mighty and exalted miracles,
which are made known by his history composed by
the excellent man [Sabhr-Isho] Rosṭâm. And it came
to pass that when he was here, he was the head of
this congregation and also of the congregation of [the
Monastery of] Rabban Zěkhâ-isho from which he went
Read — KÚKOÇ. 2 Read, with Vat. .
3 See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 206, and supra, p. 67. It is
clear that the Monastery of Rabban Zěkhâ-Îsho' was on a
higher level in the mountains than Bêth 'Âbhê, because it was
colder to live in, but its exact situation is unknown.
.ܠܓܡܘܪܝܗܘܢ Read ܀
5 See supra, pp. 108, 210.
<pb n="215"/>
forth. And one steward and governor and guardian
ordered the affairs of both monasteries, and the monks
of that monastery did not act in any way without the
command of the steward who was elected from this
congregation, nor did the monks here oppose in any
way the commands of the steward elected from that
congregation, for it was a matter which excited the
praise of God with all men. And this thing was ru-
moured among all the monasteries of this country. And
although both Rabban Jacob and Rabban Zěkhá-Ishő
came forth from that holy monastery in Mount Izlå
there was neither division nor severance of love on
account of this. So also when the blessed Mar Abraham
had been borne to the rest of the grave, like a shock
of corn in its season,' and the standing corn at its
time [of harvest].* this arrangement, ³ that one steward
and governor should minister unto both these holy
monasteries, continued for a long time after him.
CHAPTER XX. +
OF THE OTHER HEADS WHO LIVED IN THIS MONASTERY.
Now, to the lives of these [men] which have al-
_ready been written, our discourse should add also some
account of the noble deeds and pious lives of the holy
fathers <pb type="textAllignment"  n="94"/> who lived in this holy monastery after
'Job v. 26.
3 Read 202, 20..
Isaiah xvii. 5.
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 217, col. 2.
<pb n="216"/>them, I mean of Rabban George of Adiabene, who
was called 'Bar-Şayyâdhê," of Sâmâ' his brother, of
Abba Nathaniel,³ of Abbâ Şelîbhâ, and of Rabban
Gabriel, who was called 'Sephrona', whose holy bodies
were laid in the place in the chapel where the monks
- say the third service of the day;6 but inasmuch as Mår
David' the Bishop, of [this] monastery, hath before our
time written upon them, as well as upon others, at the
request of Khûzn[a] hir, the believing man from the
* I. e., "George surnamed 'son of fishermen"", he flourished
about A. D. 650 under the Patriarch Ḥenân-Îsho' I. See
B. O., . I, p. 217, col. 2. His life was the first in the "Little
Paradise." B. O., iii. 1. p. 218.
" A Persian name?
3 See supra, p. 96, note 3. For his works see B. O., iii. 1, p. 224.
* See supra, p. 96.
5 See supra, Bk. I. chap. 28, p. 96.
6
usually means 'refectory,' but here it must mean
the place in the church where the service was held after, . .,
the meal which was eaten in the evening by the holy men who had
fasted all day; by laymen this service is called "the prayer
before sleep." See Badger, The Nestorians, vol. ii. p. 18.
7 I. e., David of Beth Rabban Zékha-Ishố, concerning the
founding of which monastery at the end of the sixth century
see B. O., iii. I, p. 255. He became a bishop under the
Nestorian Patriarch Timothy, who is said to have sat from
780-823. See Wright, Syr. Lit., p. 845; and B. O., iii. I,
p. 254, where a list of his works is also given.
8 This name is corrupt. We should probably read
- Ḥawâs + Nâhidh, "who hath Anahîd for a sup-
port," or perhaps and Hôzân + Nâhêdh - heart +
Anahid. For Anahîd in proper names see Horn, Sassanidische
Siegelsteine, Berlin, 1891, p. 32.
<pb n="217"/>
village of Bashosh,' I pass on to recount the history
of those, the narratives of whom are not written
down.
CHAPTER XXI.
OF ABB SIMON [WHO WAS SURNAMED] THE "BEARDLESS.”
I entreat the wisdom of wise and understanding
readers, that as they advance in the study of this book,
they may hold me entirely free from blame should
it appear [to them] that one narrative is in advance
of its correct position, and another is after. For not
all narratives will admit of being written down in
chronological order, lest peradventure the root of history
being severed, the narrative should lean³ to one side,
and become like an animal which tries to walk upon
two of its four legs, a thing which it is not in any
Iway possible to do. What then?
Now in the time of Mâr George, the Catholicus³
and Patriarch, of holy memory, there lived in this our
monastery an old holy man who was called Simon, on
whose face, according to what is written by his fellow
* Bâshosh, where Abraham established a school, lay near
Shalmath, in the district of Shôsh, (See Badger, Nestorians,
vol. 1. p. 392) in the diocese of Margâ, near Môșul. See Hoff-
mann, Auszüge, p. 223 ff. Of Shôsh Yâķût (iii, p. 334£) says:—
والشوش قلعة عظيمة عالية جدا قرب عقر الحميدية من اعمال
الموصل قيل هي اعلى من العقر ولكبر لكنها في القدر دونها
3 Read, omitting ..
See supra, p. 179ff.
ܞܢܛܐ For
.ܪܓܠܝܢ or ܪܓܠܐ Read 4
5 He sat from 661-680.
ee
<pb n="218"/>monks, by reason of the austerity of his ascetic life,
and the severity of his abstinence, no hair remained
in his beard, and for this reason he was surnamed the
"Beardless." <pb type="textAllignment"  n="95"/> He was a great and glorious man
in his days, for by the word of his mouth every affair
of the monastery was governed by the ordering of his
wisdom. And his old age shone like a broad and
splendid beam of light through his lofty understanding,
and his exalted philosophy.' And like a wise merchant
he gathered together and filled his soul with all manner
of riches of the treasures of the Spirit, so that the
word which our Lord spake, "Every scribe that be-
cometh a disciple of the kingdom of heaven, is like
unto a wise man, who bringeth forth from his treasures
things new and old," was fulfilled in him; but all the
glorious things of this man are drowned in the sea of
oblivion³ because of the length of the time in which
they happened before us.
CHAPTER XXII.*
OF THE GOING DOWN OF RABBAN SIMON TO GEORGE THE
CATHOLICUS, [AND OF THE BARRENNESS WHICH HE MADE
TO FLOWER IN THE CITY OF ADHATT₁].
Now when the blessed Mår George the Patriarch³
went up from the countries of Persia and Bêth Kaṭrâyê,
.ܘܕܦܝܠܣܘܦܘܬܗ Point -
2 St. Matthew xiii. 52.
3V, a rare word. See B. O., iii. 1, p. 54,
1. 19.
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 183, col. I.
فخخضه s Read
ܕܒܝܕ ܩܛܪܝܐ Read 6
<pb n="219"/>
because he had been absent there a long time, and
because everything concerning him was a joy or a
sorrow to this holy congregation,' when all the holy
Elders heard of his coming to the paternal throne of
Bêth Aramâyê, they decided to send suitable men
to meet him and to salute the father of fathers. And
they all entreated this honourable head of the mon-
astery, Abba Simon, to be the agent by whose means
the homage due to his holy fatherhood might be con-
veyed to him; and this holy old man undertook to do
so gladly, and he and others went down to the gate
of the Patriarch. And when they had gone in to the
city of Ḥadhattá,³ <pb type="textAllignment"  n="96"/> a certain God-fearing man
received them into his house, and he and his wife
were childless,* like the God-fearing Shunammite woman³
and her husband, to whom, from the time that the
prophet Elisha entered into their house, God gave a
son through the prayers of the prophet. And when
Abbá Simon asked those aged people how they did,
they revealed to him that they had no child at all to
be the heir of their old age; and the holy man gave
them some water in which he had washed the cross
which was upon him, and said to them, "Behold, God
I will give you a male child, and his name shall be called
John;" and he went down to the door of the father
of fathers.
I. e., they shared in his joy and sorrow.
Seleucia. See supra, p. 183.
الحديثه 3
It was situated on the left bank of the
Tigris, about a farsal below the mouth of the Great Zâb. See
Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 178, 234 and note 1501.
* Literally, 'were in barrenness.' 52 Kings iv. 17.
<pb n="220"/>CHAPTER XXIII. *
OF MAR JOHN OF DELÛM.³
And it came to pass that that Divine power which
cleaveth to those who fear it, and which has worked,
and [still] worketh in a marvellous manner in all gener-
ations through them, even as it worked with Sarâ
(Sarah) and Rephka (Rebekah)³ and Hannah and the
* Extracts from this chapter are given in B. O., iii. I,
p. 183. col. 1.
He flourished about A. D. 690. See B. O., iii. 1, p. 183,
col. I.
3 Arab., a region to the south-west of the Caspian Sea,
having Adhôrbâîgân on the west, Ķazwîn on the south, and
Tabaristan on the east. With Dêlûm, Gilân (older form Gêlân)
is often mentioned. Dêlûm represents the steep mountainous
tract of country, covered with woods and abounding with
streams of water, which is opposite Ṭabaristân, while Gîlàn
the orth is the flat, fertile plains at the foot of the
mountains.
قال ابن حوقل وبلاد الديلم سهل وجبل فالسهل
يسمى الجيل والسهل هو ساحل على بحر الخزر تحت جبال الديلم
See Géographie d'Aboulféda, ed. De Slane, p. 426. The half-
savage inhabitants of Dêlûm served as mercenaries in the
armies of the Sassanide kings, and some of them were, as we
learn from the following extract from Yaķût (ii, p. 711), settled
near Shahruzûr.
دیلمستان قرية قرب شهرزور بينهما بسعة
فراسنح كان الديلم في ايام الاكاسرة اذا خرجوا للغارة عسكروا بها
وخلّفوا سَوَادَهم لَدَيْها وانتشروا فى الارض غايبين فاذا فرغوا من
For the chief towns غاراتهم عادوا اليها ورجلوا الى مستقرهم .
of Dêlûm see De Slane, op. cit., p. 428f.; for references to the
people of Dêlûm as mercenaries see Nöldeke, Geschichte der
Perser, p. 479, note 1; and compare Hoffmann, Auszüge, note
1640; and B. O., iii. II, p. DCCXL f.
4 Genesis xxi. I.
° I Samuel I. 20.
5 Genesis xxv. 21.
<pb n="221"/>
Shunammite woman,' worked also with those believing
people, and made perfect; and according to the prayer
and prophecy of the holy old man, when the season
of the year came round, a child of their old age was
born unto them, and according to the command of
Rabban Simon they called him John. And as God
hath sanctified to His household the fruit which hath
been born from barrenness, and by His care for them
hath made them exalted and glorious in their gener-
ations, (as for example, Isaac' and Jacob³ and Samuel*
and others), that same Power which governeth all things.
and which manifesteth extraordinary things through
His saints, and which makes them, from being fruits
of the body, fruits of the Spirit, also established as a
witness of His effectual might, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="97"/> which is above all
things, that man of whom we now write. And the Holy
One set him apart, like Samuel, from his childhood, and
accounted him to be His own, and made him a member
of His household. And when this child had been born
to his truly believing parents, whose lives rejoiced in
him as in the air which they breathed, (for he was the
light of their consolation), with great watchfulness and
care for him they placed him in a school; and because
the Lord knoweth His own, and worketh effectually
that He may be known of them, he learned in a short
12 Kings iv. 17.
3 Genesis xxxv. II.
2 Genesis xxi. 1-6.
* I Samuel vii. 15-17.
5 The school was called Beth Yulphânâ.
Derâsha
Beth
and Madhresht, but more commonly
02 oxon. For the methods employed for teaching children,
and a list of the books ordered to be read, see B. O., iii. 11,
p. CMXXXVII ff.
<pb n="222"/>time the Psalms and the other subjects which
it is the duty of boys to learn. And when he was
some few years old, when as yet he had experienced
neither the motions of the body nor the importunities
of the passions, he forsook those old people, worthy
of blessed memory, and everything, and came to this
holy monastery. Now although many have written
histories about this blessed man, especially Abhû Nôḥ,'
who resteth among the righteous, I will relate briefly
a few matters concerning him. It would seem that
his coming [to this monastery] took place in the days
of the holy Mâr Abraham, him of Beth Rabban Zěkhâ-
Isho, as I will shew at the end. Now that same Divine
grace which brought the child into existence through
the prayers of the holy Abba Simon, placed him at
the door of his cell, so that just as he had been the
cause of his birth, so he should also be the guide and
leader of his early manhood in each sublime step of
the ascetic life. And when Abba Simon knew who he
was, and whence he came, and the cause of his coming
to the monastery, for the young man informed him
concerning these things little by little, his affection
went forth to him, and he loved him much, even as
Jacob loved his beloved Joseph when he saw³ him.
And when the [other] holy Elders had learned how he
* Abhû Nûh of Anbar, the disciple of Abraham Bar-Dashen-
dad of Beth-Şayyâdhê, surnamed the "Lame", (who flourished
about A. D. 720), was a contemporary of the Patriarchs Joshua
• and Timothy and flourished about A. D. 810. He wrote the
"Solution of the Kur'ân," pax, a "Disputation against
heretics," and "other excellent works", among which was, pro-
bably, the History of John of Dêlúm. See B. O., iii. 1, p. 212.
Read with A,
3 Genesis xlvi. 29.
<pb n="223"/>
had been born, because of the majesty of that holy
old man and the honour in which he was held in this
congregation, they offered no opposition on account of
his youth to his receiving the tonsure. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="98"/> Now
when he had become a disciple he was set to do
the work of the monastery, and to be the keeper of
the vineyard of the monastery which was situated in
Dûrê, a village of Naḥla dhe Malkâ; and he con-
tinued in this service a long time living nobly a life
of excellence, after the manner of the Elders who had
led a monastic life from their youth up. And he
made for himself of the vine branches in the vineyard
a little hut³, in which he tended the vines and watched
and laboured the whole time that he was there, and in
which, to this day, mighty deeds and healings of sick-
nesses are wrought by the prayers of that holy man.
And the believing and God-loving people of that
village testify that they had recourse to him in every
affliction, and having asked for the prayers of that
holy man, rest and deliverance were afforded unto them.
And the venerable old man Elisha relates:-"When I was
sent there by the monastery to be the keeper of the
vineyard, the marks of the fingers of the blessed man
still remained in the plaster of mud with which he
had plastered that cave. And when I was in the
vineyard by myself," and there was no man with me,
* See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 207.
* Since this place was situated in Dâsen, it may be either
Nahala, or Melik on the little river Gherasin, in Margâ. See
Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 201.
3 a rare word.
4 Literally "they used to make use of him as a mediator."
.ܒܠܚܪܪܝ Read 5
<pb n="224"/>the Kartěwâyê' came against me to carry away the
iron tools and the provisions which were with me; and
when I perceived that they were breaking down the
hedge and coming through into the garden, I cried out
to Mâr John [to come] and help me. And I saw an
old man of lofty stature who appeared to me standing
at the door of the cave, clothed in glorious and shining
apparel, and when I saw him gladness came over me.
And he deceived those thieves with apparitions* and
he hid the cave from them, and having sought much
for it, and finding it not, they departed and went away.
Thus the Lord protected me and all that was with
me by the prayers of that holy man." <pb type="textAllignment"  n="99"/> Now that
blessed man planted a nut tree there, and nuts like
unto those which it produced³ were not seen upon any
other tree there, and although they took many [cuttings]
from it, and planted them, they never produced any
tree. And, as it is written concerning the prophet
Samuel, "It was heard³ from Dan even to Beer-sheba
that Samuel was to be a prophet of God," so also
was this word spoken' concerning this man by reason
of the miracles which he wrought from his youth up.
* The Kurds of Kartaw lived in the region above
Arbela, to the west of the Lower Zab. See Hoffmann, Aus-
züge, p. 207.
2 I. c., phantoms, spectres. This word is explained:―
¿cäx. cã© án qui bah¸àª àil, faj äé mýtá mál 3
*See Brit. Mus. Rich 7203, fol. 1886; col. 2; and
Brit. Mus. Orient. 2441, fol. 3806, col. 2.
.ܕܛܥܝܢ Read :
Read with Vat.,
4 Read bel.
6 I Samuel iii. 20.
and translate ,ܐܬܡܠܝ Hofmann would read ܕܬܡܠܠܬ For 1
<pb n="225"/>
CHAPTER XXIV."
OF THE FAMINE WHICH TOOK PLACE IN THEIR DAYS IN
THIS COUNTRY, [AND OF THE DEPARTURE OF JOHN AND
HIS MASTER TO NÊRĚBHA OF BETH-GAZZA.]
In the book which was composed by David, the
pious Bishop of the Kartěwâyê, which is called the
"Little Paradise," which begins with the history of
Rabban George bar-Şayyâdhê,³ the head of the mon-
astery, in the history of Abba Şelibhâ the Aramean*
it is made known that a great famine took place in
this country. Now from this passage it would seem
that the blessed Mâr John [did not] 3 receive the ton-
sure at the hands of Mar Abraham, because at the
time of this famine the blessed Abraham was dead.
And when the famine had become very severe, and
there was no help to alleviate it from anywhere, Abbâ
Simon, who had three disciples, one of whom was our
blessed John, gathered them together, and said to them,
"Come, my children, let us depart from this place and
go to the country of the mountains, and let us eat the
leaves of the trees and not die;" and he took them
and they departed to Nėrěbha dhe Bêth Gazzâ,6 but
some say that they went to the country of Salakh.'
"the word concerning Samuel of old was fulfilled also in this
man by the signs which he was accustomed to work from his
youth up."
This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. I, p. 184, col. 1.
2 See supra, p. 192, note 1. 3 See supra, p. 96, note 2.
* See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 24 and note 1997.'
5 But see supra, pp. 222, 223.
6 I. c., they retired into the more mountainous parts of
Dåsen.
The Bishopric of Salakh is, apparently, to be sought for
ff
<pb n="226"/><pb type="textAllignment"  n="100"/> And while they were thus living upon the
berries of the trees, and were being directed by the
blessed old man to the saving of their lives, the time
of the departure of Rabban Simon drew near and
arrived. And as Jacob called his sons," so he called
his disciples, and said to them, “Come, my children,
my doctrine is to me, and I will tell you what things
will happen unto you after my departure from this
world." And when the first had drawn near him, he
answered and said, "Thou shalt take to thyself a wolf;"
and to the second he said, "No man shall follow thee,
my son, or know the way in which thou shalt depart
from the world;" [and to the third he said], "As for
thee, my son John, behold, our Lord will magnify thee
with miracles and signs, and He will make thee a head
and a chief in the congregation of the brotherhood of
ascetics, and thou shalt teach the heathen barbarians;"
and these prophecies of the holy man came to pass to
the three of them, according to what is written in his
history.
CHAPTER XXV.2
OF HOW RABBAN JOHN WAS TAKEN CAPTIVE BY THE
BARBARIANS.
Now when that holy old man had departed this life,
and his three disciples remained behind in his cave,
one of them took the books which their blessed master
in the present territory of the Bâlik-Kurds near Rawandiz. See
Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 245.
Genesis xlix. 1.
2 This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 184, col. 1.
<pb n="227"/>
had written and went down to the villages to sell
[them], and to bring back food for them [all]. And
when he had seen the world and the fairness thereof
he took unto himself a wife; this is the man who took
unto himself a wolf. Now when the two other disciples
who remained behind had waited for some days, and
their companion did not return, the second one went
down to see what had become of him that had gone
first, and he likewise did not come back, and it is
not known what became of him; it is said of him, how-
ever, that he became an anchorite in the inner
mountains. And when the excellent John saw that he
was forsaken by his two companions, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="101"/> and that
they were not, he also went down to see what had
become of his two brethren. And according as the
event happened and [by the working of] the Divine
Providence that brought the holy man in the way to
be the means of fulfilling the prophecy concerning him-
self, the men of Délûm' went forth to spoil and to
make a raid upon the country where the blessed man
was, and thus they also carried him off into captivity,
and brought him to their country. Concerning this
holy man these [facts] must suffice, for very many and
great things are written concerning him.
CHAPTER XXVI.
OF RABBAN JOSEPH THE HEAD OF THE MONASTERY.
Now according to what we have learned from the
history of this holy Rabban Joseph, he came from the
country of Shâhrâzûr,' and was a kinsman of the blessed
1 See supra, p. 220, note 3. 2 See supra, p. 211, note 3.
<pb n="228"/>Rabban Gabriel, who was called the "Dancer"," and
during the lifetime of that blessed old man he came
here, and became his disciple. He was a humble,
happy, painstaking and abstinent man, who, according
to what is said, accounted all earthly things as ashes
and dung compared with the ascetic life. And having
excelled in the glorious works of asceticism, the mother
of life, after the heads of the monastery who followed
one after the other, the choice of the whole congregation
fell upon this holy man, and he was ordained chief
and governor over them; and when he had ministered
in the office four years, he left it in the manner in
which we are about to bring to light.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="102"/>
CHAPTER XXVII.
OF ŞELIBHA-ZEKHA THE CATHOLICUS, [AND OF HIS COMING
TO THIS MONASTERY].
After the death of Mår Ḥénân-isho,³ the Catholicus
and Patriarch of holy memory, the prince of fathers,
the storehouse of grace, the mighty and spiritual man,
Sělibhâ-Zěkhâ became the head of the Church. Now
this man, according to what ecclesiastical histories write
concerning him, was an avaricious and a haughty man.
* He was ordained Bishop of Bêth Garmai by the Nestorian
Patriarch Şĕlîbhâ-zěkhâ who died about A. D. 729; see Bar-
Hebraeus, Chron. Eccles., col. 149, and note 2.
“labourer', a rare word.
3 He sat from A. D. 686-701. For his writings see
B. O., iii. 1, p. 154.
<pb n="229"/>
And when he heard of the golden' Book of the Gospels
which our Mâr Isho-yahbh, the blessed in everything,
had bequeathed to this our monastery, he came with
all his insolent pride to take it and to carry it away
with him to Mědhînáthâ dhě Beth Armâyê.³ And when
he had come unto the monastery and this assembly
had received him joyfully, even as they were wont to
receive the other Patriarchs who had come for the
worship and honour of the place, he demanded of
Rabban Joseph, the head of the monastery, that he
should bring him that Book that he might rejoice in
the sight of it. Now when he had done so, for he
had no power to withhold it, and moreover, he did
not comprehend what was in the heart of the Catholicus,
he brought the Book from the Library and gave it
into his hands. And when the Catholicus saw the
splendour and beauty of the Book, which was ornamented
with pure gold, and precious stones, he was devoured
by desire for it, and he took it and laid it in his
wallet. Then the head of the monastery answered
and said to him, "Thou art not acting rightly in taking
our Book in this iniquitous manner." And the Catholicus
said, "Ye solitaries have no need of this Book, there-
fore let the believers enjoy it;" and straightway he
commanded those that were with him <pb type="textAllignment"  n="103"/> to set
out on their way quickly. Now when this had taken
place, the board for summoning the congregation was
1, a rare word.
27. e., Isho'-yahbh III. of Adiabene.
3 I. e., to Seleucia.
* Or, 'saddle-bags', - Arab. 1, and _, a 'leather bag'.
.ça rare wordܛܠܘܡܐܝܬ 3
<pb n="230"/>struck, and those among the ascetics who were young
and strong ran after the Catholicus and stopped him,
even as David did Gulyadh (Goliath), and they
prevailed against him with stones and sticks. And when
they had come up with him they threw him off his
mule, and they buffeted him with outspread hands
and closed fists in an unseemly manner although they
had it in their power to take the Book [from him]
without striking a blow. Now the abandonment [to
this treatment] was wrought upon him by God because
he coveted that which was not his own. And when the
aged Elders heard what had been done to him by the
novices, they gathered themselves together and went
forth to appease the Catholicus, and they began to
apologize for what had taken place without their know-
ledge and consent; and in this manner they pacified
Şĕlîbhâ-Zěkhâ, and he departed from them.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
OF THE DEPARTURE OF RABBAN JOSEPH TO THE MONASTERY
OF RABBAN BAR-IDTA.³
Now when the blessed Joseph, the head of the
monastery, saw what had been done to Şĕlîbhâ-Zĕkhâ
the Catholicus by the brethren, he abandoned the
* See supra, p. 54, note 3. 21 Samuel xvii. 40.
3 It is doubtful. by which Bar-'Idtâ this monastery was
founded. It may have been the Bar-'Idtâ who lived in the time
of Isho-yahbh of Arzon (580-595), and who was the con-
temporary of Jacob the founder of the Monastery of Bêth 'Âbhê;
he is often quoted by Thomas of Marga. See supra, p. 38,
note 2.
<pb n="231"/>
headship of the monastery, and dwelt quietly in his
cell. And when the brethren of the Monastery of
Rabban bar-Idtâ heard [of this], inasmuch as they had
neither head nor guardian, they came after the blessed
man, and thus at their entreaty, and by the advice of
the Elders of this monastery, he went and became the
head and governor of the monastery, and ministered
in that office with all the ability which the headship
required.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="104"/>
CHAPTER XXIX.
OF AYAS' SHAIBNAYA' WHO WISHED TO SLAY RABBAN JOSEPH,
AND OF THE FLIGHT OF RABBAN FROM BEFORE HIM.
Now there lived in the neighbourhood of that mon-
astery a man whose name was Ayâs, and he was a
man of the tribe of Dhûhl,³ and belonged to the family
surnamed Shaibânâyė, and he was the store-keeper of
the grain of that monastery, and of all its property.
The day of his commemoration was the same as that of Jacob
of Bêth 'Abhê. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 181. Cf. also
بغازرَ إِلَى جَنْبِ قَرْيَة يقال لها باربيثا [بازعيتا read] بينها وبين
.707 .Tabari ii, p مدينة الموصل خمسة فراسنج
إياس Arab :
2 I. c., the descendant of Shaiban.
3 See Wüstenfeld, Genealog. Tabellen der Arabischen Stämme,
B. 18; Caussin de Perceval, Essai sur L'Histoire des Arabes,
Table 9, part A (in Vol. 1) and vol. II, pp. 449, 572, 592,
599, 603; Nöldeke, Geschichte der Perser, pp. 330, 338;
and cf. Yâķût ii. p. 349, 1. 18
✓
si s
See also Brit. Mus. MS. 23,355, fol. 241a (Kitâb al-
Ansab, by al-Sam'ânî.
.ܕܙܪܥܥܗ Read 4
<pb n="232"/>And he craftily' asked the brethren of that monastery
to give him a place in which he might build a house*
to shelter his cattle, and they in their simplicity com-
manded him to build a house wherever he chose. He
therefore built a khân³ by the side of the King's*
highway, in the fields belonging to the monastery, and
by those who passed along the road, as well as by the
inhabitants the building was called the "Khân" of Ayas;"
and little by little as he obtained power, he seized upon
.ܒܨܢܥܢܳܐ Read :
.a place of gathering together ܒܝܬ ܨܘܒܐ -
refuge, place of موالة
3 The Syriac word
or
safety. See Kamus, Bûlâk edition, A. H. 1303, vol. 4, p. 62.
Payne Smith, Thes., col. 2036. In Ibn Haukal we have
,ban, granary ܡܘܠܐ cf. Neo-Syriac ,ܒܝܬ ܓܘܣܐ or ,ܒܝܬ ܨܘܒܐ — It
and بيت موالة which Hoffmann corrects into,بيت موالة
concerning which De Goeje says "proprie domus refugii adhi-
betur sensu domus spectabilis," but Dozy asks 'ne serait-ce pas
plutôt maison fortifiée?" See Supplément aux Dictionnaires Arabes,
t. 11, p. 777, col. 1; De Goeje, Bibliotheca Geographicorum
Arabicorum, Pars secunda, Viae et Regna Descriptio Ditionis
Moslemicae Auctore Abul-Kasim ibn Haukal, p. 81, line 8, and
pars 4, p. 372. For "Mill-house" see Thomas of
Margâ (text) p. 238, 1. 11.
.ܕܡܠܟܐ Read ܀
.ܝܬܝܒܝܢ rܘ ܝܬܒܝܢ Read either 5
6 I know of no other word by which to render, which
meant a place where cattle, horses, asses, camels, etc., could
be placed in safety for the night, or in time of war (compare
the Border "peel-towers"). Ayàs's building was no doubt a
private khan, the like of which exist in great numbers in the
east at the present day. They are built in the form of a
quadrangle, and have usually one large, strong door which is
strengthened with heavy bars of wood, and fastened by massivė
bolts. On each side of the doorway are rooms for the accom-
modation of travellers, and along each of the walls are several
<pb n="233"/>
all the fields round about it." And he slew the steward
who lived in the monastery, and thinking to act like
[Herod] Agrippa," who having slain the blessed James,
the brother of John, laid hands on Simon Peter also, this
daring man, having slain that blessed man and cast
his venerable body into a well of water in one of the
cultivated fields of the monastery-which is to-day
called Muḥarrakiyyâ³-sent watchmen by night to the
blessed Joseph to spy out the place where he was and
to slay him. Now the blessed man learned this from
the believing neighbours of the monastery, [who said].
"Behold, this evil man has threatened to destroy thee
also." And he left [the monastery] and went to the neigh-
bourhood of the city of Bâladh,' to the region of Awânâ,³
stalls or chambers, usually open in the front, where the beasts
are fed and sheltered. In the centre of the courtyard the
camels are unloaded and their burdens piled up for the night.
Such khâns usually have a supply of water either in a well in
the courtyard, or close at hand outside. They are more
expensive to stay at than the large public khâns, many of which
I have been built for the poor by rich men, and endowed with
funds to pay for keeping them clean.
* I. e., the monastery of Rabban bar-'Idtâ.
2 Acts xii. 1.
متحرق or مُتحرق For the name مُحيَّه or مُحَرفيه .
see Yakût vol. 1, p. 91, 1. 18; p. 391, 1. 20; p. 451, 1. 1;
p. 538, 1.5; and vol. ii, p. 433. 12.
See supra, p. 61, note 4.
5 Awânâ, which marked the limit of the church province of
Bêth Nuhâdhrâ, lay on the east bank of the Tigris, a little
above Môșul, and nearly opposite to Eski-Môşul. According
to Yakut the Monastery of Abbâ Yâwseph lay on the caravan
road near the Tigris about one farsaḥ from Bàlàdh. See the
maps in Černik, Technische Studien-Expedition durch die Ge-
gg
<pb n="234"/>a village of Bêth Nûhḍĕrân,' and there by his
hands the Lord laid the foundations of and established
that holy monastery, which has been called after his
name in memory of him, and has obtained renown.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="105"/> Now I have learned all these things from
the history of this holy man which was composed by
the venerable Mar Athķen,³ the monk, of the holy
monastery of Rabban Aphni-Mâran.*
CHAPTER XXX.
OF RABBAN MÂR JOHN, METROPOLITAN BISHOP OF ADIABENE.
I should be an enemy of the truth and of the
living Word of Christ, if in these writings I attempted
to manifest flattery of [any] man, or if for the sake of
polluted gain I dared to approach matters which are
beyond my strength.
Moreover, I should appear silly
biete des Euphrat und Tigris, (in Ergänzungsheft No. 45 zu
Petermann's "Geographischen Mittheilungen", Gotha, 1876); and
Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 212.
The MSS. have.
ܒܝܬ ܢܘܗܕܪܐ Assemani has
B. O., iii. 1, p. 477, col. 2, at the foot. On this province see
Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 208-216, but especially note 1662
(p. 209).
* The last three lines of this chapter are quoted in B. O., iii. 1,
p. 217, col. 1.
3 For his other writings see B. O., iii. 1, p. 216.
* The limit of the church province of Bêth Nuhâdhra on the
north west was marked by the Monastery of Rabban Aphnî
Måran dhě Khurkmâ, which was called by the Muhammadans
Dêr al-Za'farân, and was near, or on, Gebel Gûdi. See Hoff-
mann, Auszüge, p. 213.
<pb n="235"/>
and ignorant if while writing and completing and
showing forth [these histories], through my love of
God, and at the entreaty of His holy men,' I should
add any matters of my own to that order which has
come down to me by the tradition of those who recount
histories, or should introduce any thing of my own into
the accounts of the holy men, even though their beauty*
would not be tarnished by the defect of my speech,
nor [their sweetness] polluted³ by the evil smell of my
manner of treatment. Now we gather the rose from
among thorns, and when we inhale its beautiful smell
with our breath, the memory of the thorns is not pre-
sent in our mind. And those who understand the
culture of flowers and plants say that they sow garlic
and onions and other vegetables which have an un-
pleasantly strong' smell round about the rose, in order
that through their nearness it may [appear to] acquire
a more beautiful smell, and to have a more splendid.
colour. Let then this history which we are writing
[take the place of] 6 the rose, and let our own evil
odour take the place of the leeks and onions and
garlic, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="106"/> so that these holy men may [appear
I. e., 'Abhd-Îsho' and the other monks of Bêth 'Abhê.
(See supra, p. 17.)
If we read, with the MSS. we must correct
.ܡܙܪܗܗܿܐ into ܡܙܪܗܡܢ and ,ܩܫܪܚܡ into ܡܪܚܡܢ
seems to have ܒܤܝܣܘܬܗܘܢ some word like ܡܙܕܗܟܰܢ After 3
dropped out.
4 Cf. Still illapbacks Brit. Mus. MSS.
Orient. 2441, fol. 388a, col. 2; Rich 7203, fol. 1966, col. 2.
5 Read
6 After the word op seems to have dropped out.
The reading of Vat. is better than that of the text.
<pb n="236"/>to] be the more glorious, and so that their glory may
increase!
Now Abbâ 'Anân-Îshố, of whom I have written
above, had a nephew whose name was John, and he
was a disciple in this monastery during the lifetime of
his uncle. And after the death of Abbâ 'Anân-Îsho,
together with the inheritance of his manner of life and
his doctrine, he inherited his cell and every thing that
he had. Now all the books which 'Anân-isho and
Åshö-yahbh his brother wrote and left behind them,
this John made to pass into the library [of this mon-
astery]. And having formed within himself all those
glorious qualities by which a man is sanctified for
living the divine monastic life, for he had been born
of parents who sprang from a blessed stock, in body
and in spirit, he at length became the head and gover-
nor of this holy monastery. And the fame of his piety_
was carried into all places, and he was ordained Bishop
of the country of Beth Beghôsh. And when the blessed
Mår Simon the Metropolitan departed this temporary
life, the choice of the Bishops and of the government,
I. e.,
2
'Anân-isho' the compiler of the Book of Paradise.
See supra, pp. 189-192.
* Bêth Běghâsh, Bêth Bâghêsh, or Bêth Bâghâsh, the
or of the Arabs, was a district which lay on the Upper
Zâb between Adhôrbâîgan and Ardabil [read Dabil] along which
the Great Zâb flows. In the eighth century of our era the seat
of the Bishop of Béghâsh was in the Church of Bai [see infra
chap. xxxix (text p. 125, 1. 3)], probably Ķala-i-Bai, the resi
dence of Melik Beg, one of the first Kurdish princes of the
Sambo dynasty, who with the help of the Syrian Christians in
the fortress of Dîz obtained the rule over the Ḥakkâri region.
See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 227. The name Bêth Beghash is
preserved in Basch Kale; see Hoffmann in Feige, Die Ge-
<pb n="237"/>
and of the believing men of Adiabene fell upon him,
and he was ordained Metropolitan by Mâr Şĕlîbhâ-
Zěkhâ, the Catholicus, concerning whom we have written
a little way back. And while he adorned the office
of head with all steadfastness, he made his body to
abstain from everything which was pleasant, and he
neither consented to drink wine, nor submitted to eat
unclean things. And all transient glory was a polluted
thing in his sight, because he had been nourished in
a life above all reproach by the overflowing abundance
of the doctrine of the holy and pious 'Anân-Isho, and
he nobly preserved to the end the teaching of his uncle
and master. And because of his love for this holy
house, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="107"/> every day, so it is said, he used to sit
in his cell and quietly meditate. And in the days of
this holy man the inhabitants of Beth Bôrê, a village
in [the district of] Nineveh, built a fine and beautiful
temple at great expense; now they had [over them] a
pious Bishop [called] Ephraim who came from this holy
monastery. And when they wished to consecrate that
temple, Ephraim came to this monastery to Már John
the Metropolitan, and at the request of the Bishop and
of the believing people of Bêth Bôrê who were with
him, he (Mår John) went and consecrated that holy
temple. And so after he had continued to be the
head of the monastery for a long time he died in this
holy monastery, where he had been born of the Spirit
and instructed in everything, and where he had been
schichte des Mar 'Abhd-İsho', Kiel, 1890, p. 10, no. 10,
(text p. 26, 1. 14, translation p. 25, at the foot). Cf.
,1 .Yakit, vol ناحية بين اذربیجان واردبيل يمر بها الزاب الأعلى
p. 446.
See supra, p. 228.
:
<pb n="238"/>honoured by being elected the head of the Monastery.
May he rise from the grave with the holy fathers who
begat him, and with them may he receive from his Lord
the reward of his actions! And behold, according to what
I have learned from the old men, his grave is by the
door of the screen' of the martyrium. Now although
the martyrium in which he was buried with the fathers,
was demolished for the sake of this new temple which
was built, nevertheless he and the other holy Metro-
politans and Bishops were left in their places undisturbed.
And if it be true, as I have heard from the Elders
that it is, five Metropolitans and eighteen Bishops are
buried in that holy chapel."
CHAPTER XXXI.
OF MAR DÎNDOWAI BISHOP OF MA ALLTHÂ.*
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="108"/> Now Mâr John had a companion in his
cell whose name was Dindowai, and he appointed him
oppάкτηs. See Du Cange, Glossarium, col. 1702.
2 The last two sentences of this chapter are quoted in
B. O., ii. 1, p. 478, col. 2.
3 He flourished about A. D. 720, and seems to have been
the first Bishop of Ma'alltha; see Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 210,
note 1666 and the authorities quoted there. He was succeeded
by Mâr Sergius, a monk of Bêth 'Abhê, who was consecrated
by Mâr Aḥà; see infra, Bk. II. chap. xlii.
42 or 2, Arab. bites, was one of the
twelve dioceses under the Maphrian of Tekrît; see Bar-Hebraeus,
Chron. Eccles., ii, col. 123. It is often mentioned together with
Henaitha, and was situated about one hour to the west of
Dehòk, a place about thirty-five or forty miles north of Môșul.
<pb n="239"/>
Bishop of Ma'allthâ and Ḥěnáithâ;' he was a venerable
and holy man, and was also a disciple in this mon-
astery. And there are in the library of this monastery
many books belonging to him which bear witness to
the love and affection which he bore to this holy house.
He also was buried in this monastery with Mår Sergius,
the bishop who came after him, of whom we shall
give some account."
CHAPTER XXXII.
OF MAR ISHO-ZĚKHA, THE SYRIAN, BISHOP OF SALAKH.
Now although the story of the holy Már Íshő-zěkhâ,
Bishop of our native country of Sělôkh has been briefly
told by me in another place, namely, in the history
of Rabban Gabriel, inasmuch as that history demanded
See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 208; B. O., iii. 11, p. dcclx; and
Le Quien, Oriens Christianus, ii. 1584f. According to Badger,
(Nestorians, vol. I, p. 174) Ma'allthâ contained twenty families
and one church in 1842-44. Yaķût (iv, p. 578, 1. 4) makes
near Geziret ibn-'Omar.
* Written and the latter vocalization being the
correct one. Ḥnâithâ- the Xvaiba of Theophylact (V. 8. ed.
Bonn p. 219, 1. 9) and Xaμaia of Theophanes; its district
seems to have reached from the valley at the mouth of the
Rowandiz tributary of the Upper Zâb to Dâûdîjâ in the western
valley of the Şapna. The modern diocese of 'Amêdîa corres-
ponds tolerably well to the old church province of Ma'allthâ,
Beth Nühâdhrâ and Ḥenâithâ. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp.
216-222; and the list of the villages in the 'Amêdia diocese in
Badger, Nestorians, vol. 1, p. 174; and B. O., iii. ii, p. dcclvii.
See infra, chap. XLII.
3 See Book VI. chap. XV. (text p. 384).
<pb n="240"/>it, it nevertheless appeareth to me that I ought to speak
of his noble deeds and triumphs among the righteous
phalanx of his companions. This blessed man came
from the country of Beth Armâye,' and according to
what I have learned from the ancients, he was a
monk in this holy monastery. It is said of him that
his food daily throughout the entire year consisted of
seven mouthfuls which he passed into his stomach.
And he made his soul a bird which was accustomed
to fly upwards always, the object of the vision and
meditation of which was beyond its body, and in his
renunciation he was free from every distracting influence.
And his cell was situated in Går Kâhnė,³ according to
I what I have learned from Rabban Matthew the Elder,
who heard it from his master Abbâ Mâran-Zékhâ.*
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="109"/> Now when Mâr John became Metropolitan of this
church province, and the Bishop of the country of Salakh
had departed from this world, they appointed Mår
John to be bishop there. And when he had gone into
this Outer Salakh' which is called Salakh of Narses,-
* See supra, p. 183, note 1.
.ܕܫܒܥܐ Read -
3 A pure Persian, or Kurdish name. Kahne or Kalınî -
Kurdish "fountain", and Gàr calls to mind the al-Gar
mountain, Ul discussed by Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 204, note
1618; see also note 2161 where a certain
"pitch foun-
tain" is mentioned. Gâr Kahnê was probably situated near
Bêth 'Abhê.
+ See B. O., iii. 1, p. 187, col. 2, at the foot.
5 The church province of Salakh was divided into
.ܣܠܟ ܓܘܝܬܐ and Inner Salakh ܤܠܟ ܒܪܝܬܐ Outer Salakh
Outer
Salakh represented the country round about Arbêl, and Inner
Salakh lay on the border of Adhôrbaîgàn. We must look
for this province in the territory of the Balik-Kurds.
Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 243-245.
See
<pb n="241"/>
now it is also called Bananes, '-[he found] there a family
of nobles who were chiefs of Salakh, and lords thereof.
And one day one of them whose name was Pharrôkh-
bandâdh made a commemoration service in honour of
Mâr Phransê in his convent, to all the scholars who
were there, now there was a school there before that
time, and at that time, and afterwards,-and when they
had mixed the wine, and had given the first cup to
Mâr Bishop, he tasted it, and behold it was acid. And
he answered and said to Pharrôkh-bandâdh, “Pharrókh-
bandâdh", and he answered and said, "Bless, master."
The Bishop said to him, "From what vine cometh this
' wine?" and Pharrókh-bandâdh said, "From such and such
a vine", and the Bishop spake to him this one word
only, saying, "Let that vine wither;" and with the curse
of the righteous man wrath clothed that vine. And
when it was the morning of the next day, after the
commemoration of the holy Mår Phranse was ended,
that man went home to his house, and he learned⭑
that the vine had withered to its very roots in the
hour in which the Bishop cursed it, and behold the
place where it withered is as if it had been burnt with
* Assemânî gives mus B. O., iii. 1, p. 479, col. 1.
2 I. e., Farrukhbhindâdh. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 289,
297. We should probably correct the Syriac thus:
.
3 Phransê can hardly be the Syriac form of 'Francis'. The
Iname is probably wrongly vowelled, and perhaps stands for
Farr+Narsê []; cf. Mihr-Narsê, Adhur-Narsê. Hoffmann.
A Rabban Fransé is mentioned together with other holy men
in the order for the burial of the priests given by Badger,
Nestorians, vol. 11. p. 307.
* Read ✓✓o.
hh
<pb n="242"/>fire, and is well known to this day. And fear fell
upon all that country.
And Jacob, my father according to the body, related
to me, and he had heard it from his fathers, that in
the district called Beth Shârônâyê* in which our village
was situated there was a great, old oak (?), which was
called the "king of the forest;" <pb type="textAllignment"  n="110"/> and in the
villages round about it there were heathen who used
to burn incense to it, and who worshipped before it,
and we wished to cut it down, but we were afraid of
the heathen who worshipped it, and also of the devil
which appeared therein. Now when we heard of the
coming of the pious Mâr Isho-zekhå into our country,
and concerning the vine which he withered by his
coming, when he had drawn near to the villages round
about us, our priests went to bring him to us. And
we commanded them that in coming back to us with
the Bishop their way should be by the side of that
tree, and they took that way. Now when the Bishop
came near to the tree and saw its beauty, which was
caused by the exceeding care [shown] to it, and learned
that it was the god of the heathen who dwelt in these
villages, without coming down from the animal³ upon
which he rode, or the matter causing him any astonish-
ment, he lifted up his eyes and hands to heaven, and
cried to the Lord, saying, “O Lord of heaven and
* The first part of this sentence is quoted in B. O., iii. I,
P. 479. col. 1.
* This is probably the village of Shirwân, lying in the
“district of Shîrwân", about eighty miles to the north-east of
Môşul. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 220, and notes 1749 and
1762.
3 Read here and elsewhere.
<pb n="243"/>
earth, uproot this god who receiveth together with
thee worship and tithes;" and at his word the branches
of that tree turned downwards, and its roots [grew]
upwards, and thus was brought to nought the falsehood
of the error of the devil which dwelt therein.
And there was a village in Inner Salakh which was
called Gôlái, the inhabitants of which were formerly
Magians, and having become disciples of the doctrine
of Christ they built a church in their village, and set
apart certain nut trees and a small plantation³ that
there might be [always] a sum of money for the main-
tenance and expenses of the church. Now when those
old men died, their children seized the nut trees and
defrauded the church of what assistance they afforded.*
And when the holy man went to that village, the
priests of the church there complained of being defraud-
ed by their fellow villagers. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="111"/> And while the two
parties were disputing with each other, the priests
saying, "These trees belong to the church," and the
laity contradicting [them], and saying, "This has never
been so," the Bishop said to the [priests], "Dispute ye
not one with another, for I believe that the Will of the
command of Christ, the Lord of the Church, will, if
those nut trees truly belong to this church, bring them
* The following story is apparently related also in Bk. VI.
chap. XV. (text p. 384, 1. 3 ff.).
* This name is spelt Sas on p. 384, 1. 3. See Hoffmann,
Auszüge, p. 245.
3 Read either Base or SS. The parallel passage reads:
.(5 .1 ,384 .text p( ܪܕܩܘ ܠܗ ܥܪ ܚܕ ܕܓܘܬܐ ܣܓܝܐܐ
* "Their children made a dispute about the nut trees, and
took them" (text. p. 384, 1. 6).
5 Read
<pb n="244"/>to the court yard of the church, without damage and
without injury, in order that your dispute concerning
their misappropriation may be rebuked." [And to the
villagers he said,] “If those nut trees are yours, they
shall remain just as they are without injury, in the
place where they are." And that Will which main-
taineth creation by its might, and to which are easy
the things which are difficult to us and appear to be
impossible, heard the voice of the son of its house,
and brought all those nut trees near to the church.
And there was there a poor old woman to whom the
men of the village had given as long as she should
live the half of the produce of a large nut tree which
was among those trees to provide her with food. And
when the sacristan rose up to beat the board' to sum-
mon the congregation for the office of the night, be-
hold, he saw that all the nut trees had come round
about the church, and in his joy he went to where
the Bishop was sleeping to announce to him the de-
parture of the trees; and the Bishop said to him, "I
know it [already], my son, be silent." And when it
was morning, and the people had heard this report,
the whole village was gathered together to that place,
and they rose up with wonder and praise, and they
marvelled and wondered, and glorified God. They
saw, moreover, that the tree upon the half of the pro-
duce of which the old woman used to live, was divided
into two halves, and that one half had come to the church
with the other trees, and the other had remained in its
place. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="112"/> Now many other things were wrought
* On the methods employed in monasteries for summoning
the monks to prayer see Usener, Der Heilige Theodosius, p. 82,
1. 18, and the note to this passage on p. 179.
2 Read
<pb n="245"/>
by the holy Bishop Mår Ishő-Zěkhá, but because of
their number I have [only] written' these three, which
will make known concerning their greatness."
CHAPTER XXXIII. 3
OF GABRIEL THE METROPOLITAN BISHOP OF KARKHA DHĚ
BETH SĚLOKH, WHO WAS CALLED THE "DANCER" [AND OF
THE DISCOURSE WHICH HE MADE].
Now this Gabriel,' of the city of Nisibis, having
come to this monastery after he had been trained in
the holy school there, laboured in the monastic life, as
Iwell as in the holy study of the Divine Books. And,
as I have learned, having triumphed in the greatest
self-abnegation,—now by reason of his abstinence and
the asceticism of his nature his passions were [neither]
stirred up, nor did there remain with him any of the
inclinations of an impure mind,-it happened to him,
because of the severity and the frequency of the fasts
and labours, which he endured beyond his strength,
that the people of the Karkhá dhě Sělôkhâyê of Beth
Garmai, at the report of his ability and self-abnegation
were moved to make him their head; and he was set
apart for them, and was ordained Metropolitan by
Şĕlîbhâ-Zěkhâ the Catholicus, together with Mår John
of Adiabene of holy memory. And when he was an
old man he came here to pray, and to receive blessings
.ܕܟܬܪܬ Read 1
* Reading with Vat.
.
3 This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 460, col. 1f.
He flourished about A. D. 720.
I. e., Kerkûk.
See supra, p. 234.
<pb n="246"/>at the tombs of his spiritual fathers. And it came to
pass that one day during the commemoration of Rab-
ban he heard certain scholars complaining, and saying,
"Would it not be more meet for this wholly famous
congregation that one of them should compose a special
service for the holy Mâr Jacob, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="113"/> rather than
borrow this one which was composed by Micha
the Doctor for some one else, and recite it for Mår
Jacob as if he were a pauper?" And Mår Gabriel, who
on account of his mincing gait was called the "Dancer",
went straightway into the place where the deacons were,
during the first session of the Psalms, and he took tablets
and wrote down the discourse which is now read for
Rabban [Jacob]. And if thou dost examine the
sequence of its composition, and the style of its lan-
guage, thou wilt not find therein one example of the
elegance of diction which the art of speaking requir-
eth. And beginning first of all with prayer,' the
discourse continueth with the words, "Let us place in
the midst one of the ranks of those who love their
Lord," and so forth. Then attacking the holy Mâr
Bâbhai, and all that congregation from which Jacob
went forth, it saith, "Mad men who were exceedingly
furious envied him with the evil imagination of their
hearts,"
," and so forth. Now we do not think that Mår
I. ., Jacob the founder of Bêth 'Âbhê.
2 M
ܥܠ ܨܪܝܟܐ but Assemani has ܐܝܟܨܪܝܟܐ The MSS. have 3
See Payne Smith, Thes., col. 1646, and Badger,
The Nestorians, vol. ii. p. 21.
6 The allusion is to the expulsion of Jacob from the Mon-
astery of Mount Izlâ. See supra p. 59.
<pb n="247"/>
Bábhai was stirred up to become the cause of the going
forth of many from that monastery without the will of
God, for if it had been so, not one of the holy men would
willingly have taken upon himself the labour of found-
ing a monastery. Moreover, Sähdônâ, who lived at
a time nearer to that dispute, in his history of Rabban
([Jacob], praises and magnifies and glorifies that holy
monastery. And behold, this also we would make
known, that although the blessed Rabban Ķâm-Ishố,*
and the holy Mår Jacob, 3 and Rabban Aphni-Mâran, *
and Emma Leontius Zînâyâ,6 and Rabban Joseph'
went forth from the monastery in like manner by reason
of a dispute, and became heads and governors in
other monasteries, they neither called nor named this
monastery a "monastery of madmen." And again Ga-
briel wishing to magnify this monastery, abuses its in-
habitants and in his passion saith concerning the person
of Mâr Jacob, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="114"/> "He left to them, that is to
say to the monks, no possession in the land, and of
everything which they possessed, that is to say the
estates which their fathers Mâr Åsho-yahbh the Catho-
licus, and Már George the Catholicus, bequeathed
to them, behold they are entirely destitute." And again
he saith, "No person is so utterly destitute of every-
thing as they are, and although they labour, that is to
say, although they gather in and carry out, in seed
See supra, p. 83.
3 See supra, p. 59.
See supra, p. 151.
4 See supra, p. 122.
5 I. e., aµµάç "abbess", a nickname, instead of Abbâ.
6 I. e., the man from Mount Zînai. See supra, p. 108, note 4.
See supra, p. 179ff.
8
9. e., Ishô'-yahbh of Adiabene.
10 See supra, p. 179 ff.
a rare word.
<pb n="248"/>time and in harvest, there is no profit to him that
toileth therein." Now he did not correct this dis-
course, and it continueth in its corrupt state.³ And
this blessed man also died in this monastery.
CHAPTER XXXIV.
OF THE BLESSED MÂR AḤÂ, METROPOLITAN OF ARBELA,
[AND HEAD OF THE MONASTERY OF BETH 'ÀBHÊ].
If now it be that the God of Abraham, the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, righteous men who
are dead, is the God of the living and not of the dead,
according to the testimony of the Divine Book, inas-
This appears to be the meaning of the text as it stands,
but see the two following notes.
I., Thomas of Margå did not correct this passage.
Assemâni translates: "Nullas eis (monachis suis) opes in terris
reliquit: et quoniam eas possidere maluerunt, en amisere omnia.
(Agros intelligit, quos eis Patres ipsorum legaverunt, Mar Jesuja-
bus, videlicet, et Mar Gregorius Catholici.) Prosequitur monachos
iterùm sugillans: Nullus illis egentior; laborem nihilominus inu-
tilem patiuntur. (Ingressum nempe et exitum, sementem et
messem.) Hunc auctor hymnum, seu Carmen, haudquaquam
emendavit, et hactenus sine ulla correctione legitur." (B. O., iii. 1,
p. 462, col. 1.).
Hoffmann would emend thus:
05052 I
||[] in or aro
ܕܐܘܬܪܘ ܐܢܘܢ | ܐܒܝܗܘܢ | ܡܪܝ ܝܫܘܥܝܗܒ | ܘܡܪܝ ܓܝܘܪܓܝܣ |
ܡܬܘܠܝܪ̈ܐ |
| pulp and D 11
| |
St. Matthew xxii. 32.
ܡܥܠܐ ܡܦܩܐ | ܙܪܥܐ ܚܨܕܐ | ܕܠܝܬ ܒܗ ܝܘܬܪܢ ܠܕܬܥܫ ܒܗ |
<pb n="249"/>
much as the righteous live with Him and are not dead,
and for their sakes He keepeth the covenant, and
performeth grace, and sheweth care for the thousands
of generations, according to the word of the Lord,'
the righteous men of old, and the just men who came
after them, and the holy men who come last, are the
children of His kingdom, even as the living and life-
giving mouth of Jesus our God' maketh known, saying,
"Many shall come from the east, and from the west,
and from the south, and from the north, and shall sit
down with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob in the king-
dom of God."³
Now in respect of the fatherhood of the holy Mar
Jacob, we may see that the promise of the word of
the Lord was fulfilled. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="115"/> For although he worked
and laboured and strove in all the various works of
the ascetic life, and loaded to the full the ship of his
own person [with] all manner of riches and sent it forth
to heaven that it might enjoy its good things in the
times of need, he nevertheless raised up governors of
all those who have been and who will be imitators of
him in the place of his dwelling, and of his manner
of life, namely, these holy men whose histories up to
the present we have been shewing forth. Now among
these was this marvellous and holy Mar Aḥâ, this glory
of ascetics, and object of praise of [spiritual] shepherds,
this canon of all beauty of those who hold the five
Exodus xx. 6.
• We should expect to read
"of Jesus our Lord".
On this point see Badger, Nestorians, vol. ii, p. 36. The ex-
pression "Jesus our God" naturally suggests a Monophysite
writer. See Wright, Catalogue, p. 262, col. 2, No. 5.
3 St. Luke xiii. 29.
ii
<pb n="250"/>talents, this wise and faithful steward of the kingdom
of heaven, this holder of the keys of the height and
the depth by the bestowal from on high of the Spirit
of God, concerning whom I will relate a few things.
Now although his birth in respect of the body took
place in the village of Awakh, in the district of Ţalânâ,"
in the country of Margå, yet, like the prophet Jeremiah,³
whom the Lord set apart to know the marvellous acts
which were about to be made manifest by Him, in his
bodily presence, and in the physical form of his limbs,
God honoured him, and made him glorious and to be
admired. Hail to the beauty of the beautiful who are
made exceedingly beautiful by the Lord! Seth be-
came beautiful by the glory of his creation and renew-
ed the glory of Adam³ his father; Joseph was beauti-
ful, and all the hateful things [which he endured] did
not mar his beauty; the beauty of Moses' made him
great, and with it the Lord smote and made a mock
St. Matthew xxv. 16.
* All the MSS. have x, but see the Syriac text p. 155. 18,
and Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 202.
3 Thomas of Margà is probably quoting some apocryphal
book.
* Compare "Seth the beautiful." Book of the Bee, ed. Budge,
p. 27, text p. 29, 1. 9.
5 There is a reference to the marvellous beauty of Adam in
the "Cave of Treasures" (ed. Bezold, p. 12). "And God formed
Adam with His holy hands, in His own image and likeness.
And when these angels saw his glorious appearance, they were
ܘܓܒܠܗ ܐܠܗܐ ܠܐܕܡ ܒܐܝܕܘܗܝ ܩܕܝܫܬܐ. "moved at the beauty or his form
ܒܨܠܡܗ ܐܝܟ ܕܡܘܬܗ. ܘܟܕ ܚܙܘ ܗܠܝܢ ܡܠܐܪ̈ܐ ܠܚܙܬܗ ܫܒܝܬܐ. ܐܬܬܙܝܥܘ ܡܢ ܫܘܦܪܗ
ܕܕܡܘܬܗ ܀
.6 .Genesis xxxix יְפָה תֹּאַר וִיפָה מַרְאָה Compare •
7 Compare N
Exodus ii. 2.
<pb n="251"/>
of the Egyptians; the beauty of David' used to drive
away the wicked spirit from Saul, and the beauty of
Daniel and his companions quenched³ the flame and
stopped the mouth of the lions: not only with the
beauty of the body, but with two-fold and double
beauty, for to the visible and apparent beauty which
nature had given them, and which grace had bestowed
upon them, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="116"/> they united also that of the soul
and mind which is prepared for the will of God.
Thus also was it in the case of this governor [Mâr
Aḥa] concerning whom my feeble discourse is about to
speak. And thus have I heard from those who recount
his glorious deeds, that together with the splendour of
his acts and the glorious brilliance of his doctrine, he
shone with the radiant beauty of a fine stature and a
noble presence, and he was also born of believing and
God-loving parents. Now this village of Awâkh was
very famous for its fear of God, and concerning its
church it is said that there were seventy priests in it
at one time. And it came to pass that the blessed
Mår Aḥa and another brother called Shubhḥal-Maran
were left orphans, for their father died when they were
little children, and the believing woman their mother
brought them up until they arrived at years of dis-
cretion; and they went forth from their village and
came with their mother to Shalmath, a village of
Saphsâphâ, and entered the school there.
And they
were maintained [there] by the labour and care of the
.12 .I Samuel xvi וְהוּא אַדְמוֹנִי עַם־יָפָה עֵינַיִם וְטוֹב רֹאִי Compare
.15 .Daniel i מַרְאֵיהֶם טוֹב וּבְרִיאֵי בָּשָׂר Compare
2
Read
4 Read
5 See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 223.
<pb n="252"/>venerable woman their mother, who is worthy of
remembrance for good, and they studied Divine doctrine;
and that power which protected the beauty of Joseph
and Moses in Egypt and of Daniel in Babylon, protected
the beauty of the blessed Mâr Aḥâ from temptations.
And when they had come to the estate of manhood
they two came and made themselves disciples in this
monastery. Now the time in which nature had brought
them into existence, was, according to what is said, a
time of scarcity of food. And when they had laboured
in the monastery' and had gone forth into cells, they
brought to themselves the venerable old woman their
mother, who had toiled during her widowhood and who
had worked with her hands and reared them, by whose
counsels their youth had been guarded from wanton-
ness, and through whose care they had become learned
in the Holy Scriptures, and they rewarded her with
natural love in the manner which was her due,' <pb type="textAllignment"  n="117"/>
and until the day of her death she was never separated
from them, neither were they neglectful in ministering
unto her. Now while Rabban Mar Aḥa wrote books,
his brother Shubhḥâl-Mâran was a book-binder.³ And
Rabban Mår Aḥâ grew and increased and became
exalted in the deeds of a pious life, which are per-
fected in the body and the soul by those who are
ascetics in very truth. And he subdued the passions,
and purified the senses, and enlightened the movements
* I. c., had passed through the period of labour in serving
the community which was prescribed by the canons of mon-
astic life. See B. O. iii. 2. p. 858.
.a rare word ,ܡܬܬܚܝܒܢܐܝܬ -
3.
.ܕܒܦܓܥܐ Read
<pb n="253"/>
of the mind, and that word which one of the holy men
wrote was in very truth fulfilled in him, "Now in the
time of youth doctrine groweth up together with the
soul and is mingled with it. And it dwelleth in silence
for a long time working in the two parts, [that is] in
the spirit and in the body, according to the ordinance
of the fathers. By its labour in the body it giveth to
the needy, and receiveth strangers, and by the things
of the spirit it shineth and enlighteneth." And he was
directed and was guided [until] ' necessity drove him
to the headship of the monastery and he drew near
to subdue it.
CHAPTER XXXV.
OF THE ELECTION OF THE BLESSED MAN MÂR AḤÂ TO
THE HEADSHIP OF THIS HOLY CONGREGATION.
Now when the blessed Mår John, the head of the
monastery who preceded him, was elected to the epis-
copacy of the Apostolic throne of Beth Beghash,' and
this congregation remained without his fatherly care,
and without a man to succeed him and to stand at its
head, Mâr Aḥâ knew that the election to the headship
by all the brethren was ready to fall upon him; and
he left his cell, and hid himself secretly in the mon-
astery³ for many days. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="118"/> And when [the conse-
cration of] the blessed John was completed by Sělibhâ-
Zěkhá the Patriarch, he came here; and when he asked
.ܥܕ ܢܨܬܗ Read -
.ܒܚܪܬܐ Read 3
See supra, p. 236, note 2.
<pb n="254"/>concerning Mår Ahâ, and they' said, "He has fled".
he adjured his brother Shubhḥâl-Mâran to find him
wherever he was. And the brethren went to seek
him, and they brought him out of the secret place in
which he had hidden himself, and thus by the ordinance
of Mâr John, and at the entreaty of the whole brother-
hood, the blessed Mar Aḥâ, who was beautiful in
appearance and beautiful in mind, stood at the head
of the planets, the children of the angel of light, Mâr
Jacob. And he walked in all the modest manner of
life which befits the humble, without ever thinking
within his pious and lowly soul that he was the head
and governor of the monastery. And while he entrust-
ed to others the business of the management of the
internal affairs of the monastery, and of going to the
gate of princes, he himself, according to the custom of the
other governors who were before him, sat quietly in
the patriarchal chamber. And according to the tradi-
tion of his uncle, ³ there used to be sent to him each
evening from the refectory, one single kind of food,
without much water in it, and it was not even prepared
specially for him, for it consisted of ordinary bread and
a little onion with some water. And thus the ship of
his humility travelled on, with a guiding wind blowing
and with its swift sails bellied out, and it flew on and
passed through all the storms which sink ships and
* Read ole.
2
a hiding place. In Brit. Mus. MSS. Or. 2441, fol. 1366,
col. 1, and Rich 7203, fol. 566, col. 2, and in Hoffman, Syrisch-
Arabische Glossen, Kiel, 1874, p. 166, No. 4365. =
المختفيات
.ܕܪܕܗ Read 3
4
-
ἀκος = ἄρμενον.
<pb n="255"/>
destroy wealth without regard. And the venerable old
men, who received it from their masters, have told us
that when he came into the congregation,' and stood
at the head of the rows [of monks]. from the begin-
ning of the service until it was ended, he neither lifted
up his eyes nor looked upon any man, but that from
the beginning until the last 'Amen' he kept his eyes
continually bent down to the ground in front of his
feet, and upon the top of the sandals in which they
were. And he made his passions submissive slaves,
and he brought them under the yoke of order from
the time that he was a novice; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="119"/> and he made
his soul to possess good habits, so that not even be-
tween himself and his soul, did he make free with his
body, even as his master Abbâ Isaias' commanded
him. And thus all the time in which he ministered
in the office of head, the sons of his congregation were
in need of no teaching, for the holy sight of his person
sufficed, as in the case of that brother who, together
with many others, used to go to Abbá Antonius 3³ each
.ܕܠܟܢܣܫܝܐ Read -
2 I. e., Isaias of Scete, who was a contemporary of the two
Macarii, Poemen, Sisoes, Paphnutius and many other famous
ascetics who lived at the end of the IVth century of our era.
See Tillemont, Mémoires Ecclés., VII. p. 194, col. 2; Cotelerius,
Eccles. Graec. Monumenta, t. 1. pp. 445, 596, 801, 808; Wright,
Catalogue of Syriac MSS., vol. ii. pp. 458-465; Assemani,
B. O., . 1, p. 46, col. 2. The Isaiah referred to and quoted
so often by Palladius was the brother of Paesius, and both were
the sons of a merchant who carried on business in Spain
one brother gave all his wealth ;ܓܒܪܐ ܚܕ ܬܓܪܐ܆ ܕܡܬܬܓܪ ܗܘܐ ܡܣܪܙܬܼܵܐ
to the poor, and the other employed his in founding and endow-
ing a monastery.
1. e., Anthony the Great.
See supra, p. 30.
<pb n="256"/>year to see him. And when Abbå Antonius asked him,
while all the other brethren were asking questions and
gaining instruction, saying, "My son, how long hast thou
been coming to me thus? and why dost thou depart
in silence?" that brother said to him, "It is sufficient
for me, O father, to see thee, that is to say the sight
of thee maketh me wise, and [teacheth me] to emulate
thy manner of life." Even so did this our holy father
become a mirror of divine beauties to all those round
about him, and while the eyes of all his children in
this congregation were looking upon him, heavenly
splendour filled his person like that of an angel. And
they too became benefited, and their minds were quieted,
and they became wise by [following] his holy example.
CHAPTER XXXVI.
OF THE ELECTION OF THE HOLY MÂR AHA, THE HEAD OF
THIS MONASTERY, TO. THE OFFICE OF METROPOLITAN.
Now when our all blessed father Rabban Mâr Aḥâ
had excelled in these and such like things, and had
led this holy congregation towards heaven for many
years, the blessed Mâr John our Metropolitan, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="120"/>
forsook the habitation with creatures of dust, and was
united with and rested among the companies of spiritual
beings; and in a good old age, and [after] a life of
Apostolic deeds he was gathered to his fathers. Now
certain people who were chief among the believers of
Adiabene, namely, the dahkane and noblemen, having had
more correctly. Dilkan is the Arabic form.
of an earlier dayankana. Compare the Armenian dehkan
---
<pb n="257"/>
experience of the piety of the life of the divine man
Mâr John the Metropolitan, and having also received
by tradition from their fathers concerning the holy
Mâr Isho-yahbh,' and the blessed Mâr George,' and
the excellent Simon,³ men who had become Metropolitans
over them from this holy monastery, were compelled
Iwith all the force of necessity to consider that stead-
fast shepherds had in all generations and in all times
been appointed to them from [this] paternal congregation.
And because they had elected Mâr John from this mon-
astery, they decided with one accord, saying, "So far
as it is possible for us we will not have a head* over
'the governor of a province.' In the Ķâmûs (ed. Bûlâk A. H.
زعيم فلاحى العجم is explained by الدهان (221 .p . . 133
The dihkan هاتين and دَهَاقِنَة .Plur ورئيس الاقليم مُعرب
then, were a class of noble landed proprietors. See Hoffmann,.
Auszüge, note 1900, p. 239; Nöldeke, Geschichte der Perser,.
p. 446f.; Bedrossian, New English and Armenian Dict., Venice,
1875-79, p. 138, col. I; and Lagarde, Armenische Studien,
p. 43, no. 603 (in Abhandlungen der Historisch-Philologischen
Classe der Königlichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaft zu Göt-
tingen, Band XXII.). According to Mas'ûdî, Wahkert (☺), g)
was the first man who bore the title of dilkan,
the
and
were divided into five classes, each of which wore
its own distinctive garments. See Les Prairies d'Or, ed. Barbier
de Meynard, tom. i. p. 241. From Thomas of Margâ we learn
that they paid 'tribute to the Shahrîghân their superiors ✓ Box
,Book i ܢܣܒܝܢ ܗܘܘ ܦܠܓܘܬܐ ܕܙܪܥܐ ܘܕܚܡܒܐ܆ ܘܕܓܪܐ ܘܟܤܦ ܪܬ ܡܢ ܕܗܩܬܐ
chap. 3 (Syriac text), p. 152.
* See supra, p. 131.
3 See supra, p. 217.
2 See supra, p. 179, note 5.
4 Reading * from. Compare Lagarde, Praetermissorum,
(Bar-Hebraeus on the Psalms) p. 164, 1.89;
NONS
Duval, Lexicon Syriacum, col. 344; Cat. Bibl. Vat., t. iii, p. 354.
kk
<pb n="258"/>us except from among the congregation of the children
of Rabban Jacob." And they went down to the holy
father of fathers, Mâr Abhâ the Catholicus,' and brought
a letter of prohibition* of the blessed Rabban Mâr Aḥâ,
and thus he was of sheer necessity obliged to go down
and receive the consecration³ to the great work of
the Metropolitanship of the countries of Âthôr and
Adiabene. And when he came up to his country the
believing men of his diocese received him as an angel
of light, and as the Apostle Simon Peter. And they
found the head whom they had chosen for themselves
exceeded by far all the expectation which they had
formed of him in their minds, both in great and in
glorious things, and in learning and in the sanctity of
his life.
I. e., Mâr Abhâ surnamed, Bar-bérikh Şebh-
yâneh, from Kashkâr. He was the second Nestorian patriarch
of that name and succeeded Phethion A. D. 740; he died
A. D. 750 aged one hundred and ten years, and was buried
in Seleucia. He was a learned man, and skilled in the know-
ledge of ecclesiastical works, and he is said to have passed all his
-See Bar ܘܟܠܗ ܙܒܢܗ ܒܩܪܝܢܐ ܕܟܬܬ̈ܐ ܫܓܝܡ ܗܘܐ ,time in reading books
Hebraeus, Chron. Eccles., ii. col. 153. According to 'Abhd-Ìsho
he wrote a "Book on Generals, and Commentaries and Inter-
ܟܬܒܐ ܕܐܣܛܪܛܝܛܐ ܘܢܘܗܪ̈ܐ ܥܡ ܬܘܪܓܡܐ "pretations full of learning
heat as it See B. O., iii. 1, p. 158f.
2 ο κώλυσις ἀφορισμός ἀκοινωνησία. See Hoffmann,
Verhandlungen der Kirchenversammlung zu Ephesus am XXII.
August CDXLIX aus einer Syrischen Handschrift, p. 92, note 146,
p. 97, note 263, (in Schriften der Universität zu Kiel, Band XX,
published by the Academia Christiana Albertina of Kiel).
.ܣܡ ܐܝܪܐ — xeporovia — ܟܝܪܝܛܘܢܝܐ 3
* See Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 162, 210ff.
<pb n="259"/>
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="121"/>
CHAPTER XXXVII.
OF THE HOLY MAR ÎSHO-YABH THE HEAD OF THE
MONASTERY.
And when the blessed Mar Aḥâ left the headship
of the monastery, and was exalted from glory to glory,
and passed from strength to strength, according to the
[words of the] Book [of Psalms]," he ordained that the
blessed Rabban isho-yahbh should be his successor,
and that he should be the guardian of this holy con-
gregation in his stead. And finally, after many years,
after the death of the holy and pious man, the good
servant of Jesus Christ our Lord, Mår Abraham, Bishop
of Nineveh, Isho-yahbh, the head of our monastery,
was made Bishop of the city of Nineveh' by the hands
of Mâr Aḥâ; and concerning this Már Åshö-yahbh I
will relate many things at the end [of this history].
Psalm lxxxiv. 7.
I. e., of Môșul, (✓✓ the place where two things join
or meet) the town on the left bank of the Tigris opposite to
the mound called Kouyunjik, which marks part of the site of
الموصل قاعدة ديار الجزيرة وهى على دجلة في .ancient Nineveh
جانبها الغربي وقبالة الموصل من البر الآخر الشرقي مدينة نينوى
Géographie d'Aboulfeda ed. Reinaud and Mac Guckin de Slane,
p. 285. See also Yakût iv, p. 682f. An interesting account
of this town is given by Ibn-Bațâțah (ed. Defrémery and San-
guinetti ji. p. 134f.), and for modern writers on Môșul and its
district see Rich, Narrative of a Residence in Koordistan, and
on the site of ancient Nineveh, vol. ii, p. 29 ff.; Felix
Jones, Notes on the Topography of Nineveh, in Selections from
the Records of the Bombay Government, No. XLIII. New
Series, p. 404ff.; Sandreczki, Reise nach Mosul, Zweiter Theil
<pb n="260"/>CHAPTER XXXVIII.
OF THE MIRACLE WHICH THE BLESSED MAR AḤÂ WROUGHT.
Now if we who are under the yoke of government
judge ourselves, we shall not be judged by those who
hold the reins of government; and if we are obedient
to their good counsels, and to their wise commands,
Justice will not sharpen the sword of its vengeance
against us. If, however, we tread these under foot we
prepare ourselves for severe punishment. And how
does this apply here? Now there was in Adiabene a
man who had transgressed by a notorious' sin which
it is not necessary for me to set down here; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="122"/>
and the eye witnesses' and those who had been injured
in the matter having come, they brought their accusa-
tion against him to that wise head while he was sitting
in the temple. And according to the express canon,
"A man is innocent in his own judgment, but when
his companion cometh he trieth him," he sent after the
offender, and rebuked him gently, saying, "If thou hast
committed this offence, confess it, and thou wilt be
Stuttgart, 1857; Sachau, Reise in Syrien und Mesopotamien,
p. 341 ff.; Černik, Technische Studien-Expedition durch die Ge-
biete des Euphrat und Tigris, [forming nos. 44, 45 of Peter-
mann's Geographischen Mittheilungen, (Ergänzungsheften)], Gotha,
1875; Layard, Nineveh and Babylon, and Fletcher, Notes from
Nineveh, London, 1850.
In Brit. Mus. MS. Rich 7203 fol. 162 6, col. I,
and Orient. 2441, fol. 348a, col. I,
01.
20 5 02 2
and
5 Brit. Mus. MS. Orient. 2441, fol. 348a, col. 2.
and
<pb n="261"/>
accepted by God in repentance, if thou desirest;" now
as he disputed the matter his accusers reproached him,
but neither at their testimony nor at the admonition
of the holy man was he ashamed. And the Metro-
politan answered and said to him, "Inasmuch as thou
wilt persist in remaining unpersuaded, and art no more
put to shame by us than thou art by other men, let
the Lord take vengeance upon thee for thy sin." And
he cursed him, saying, "I trust in our Lord who hath
made us servants of this pasture, and hath given us
power that every thing that we bind or loose in heaven
and in earth shall be bound or loosed, that if thou art
guilty, thou shalt receive the penalty which thou deserv-
est; but that if, on the contrary, thou art innocent,
thou shalt be preserved free from harm." And hardly
were the words from the mouth of the holy man ended,
when the plastering' of the ceiling of the temple fell
down cubit by cubit upon the head of that wretched
man; and thus being exposed and made a mockery of
he fell down in the temple in the presence of the holy
man and of a large congregation, and his soul left him
and departed. And fear fell upon every man at the
words of the blessed man Mâr Ahâ.
متسكسيه Read :
2
a rare word.
<pb n="262"/><pb type="textAllignment"  n="123"/>
CHAPTER XXXIX.
OF THE REVELATION AND INDICATION OF WHAT SHOULD
HAPPEN TO THE BLESSED AND HOLY MAR AḤA, AND OF
HOW HE SHOULD END HIS LIFE, AND [WHERE] HE SHOULD
BE BURIED.
Now, according to the word of Mår Xystus, "God
loveth the soul of the righteous man, and showeth
plainly in his mind what is, and what is about to be;"*
and again, "The soul of the righteous man is betrothed
to God, and the soul of the righteous man seeth God,
in that it bears itself before Him, according to His
will." Even thus to the soul of the holy Mår Aḥa,
the vigorous worker of His will, did He reveal the
measure of his life, and the place of his death, and
the place where he should rest; and he constrained his
* Bishop of Rome from A. D. 432-440. See Butler, Lives
of the Saints, Mar. 28; and B. O, iii. 1, p. 48.
• See Gildemeister, Sexti Sententiarum recensiones Latinam
Graecam Syriacas conjunctim exhibuit, Bonn, 1873. The Syriac
text has been published by Lagarde, Analecta Syriaca, Leipzig,
1858.
J Sapientis anima deo aptatur a deo. ψυχή σοφοῦ ἁρμόζεται
mpòç Geóv. Sapientis anima semper intuetur deum. (del Beòv
opą.) Sapientis anima semper est cum deo (σúveσTIV dei Beų).
See Gildemeister, Sexti Sententiarum, pp. 70, 71, Nos 416-418.
In Lagarde, Analecta, p. 23, L. 30, and p. 24, II. 1-6, the
passage runs:-
dooppal
dels
thas indus pulpo di pasal
Label
Sedap lord:
Ja No
<pb n="263"/>
soul and added to the acts of his ascetic life. So then,
by the might of his prayers, I will write down the rest
of this history which is to follow, and I will show forth
to my supine companions those pillars of light [who]
went forth from this holy congregation, the histories
of whom have been allowed to fall into oblivion by
the slothful, (of whom I myself am one), and have not
been written down, and behold it is many many years
ago since thou, ○ beloved of his Lord, and friend of
His saints, Mâr 'Abd-isho, didst with all manner of
wrestlings and supplications require of me to set before
thee in writing those things which I had been accustomed
to sow in thine ears. But I was not' persuaded to do
this, for two reasons, firstly because [the writing of]
histories brings upon those who compose them severe
labour, and secondly because of the cessation from daily
work, and the constant urging of the mind [which is
necessary] to produce and bring forth into remembrance
the deeds and glorious acts [of holy men], which have
been laid up in its store house for a long time.
Now when [this Már Aḥa] was a child and was
in the school of the village of Shalmath, he saw a
dream in which he was clothed in the garments of
the priesthood, like a bishop, and was attired with
the mitre,³ and held the episcopal staff. And he was
1 Read A.
* See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 223.
3 Mas
φακεώλιον “fascia qua caput involuebant olim
Saraceni." See Du Cange, Gloss. Script. Med. et Inf. Grae-
citatis, col. 1657. as is glossed in A by xx, a word which
is explained in Brit. Mus. MS. Rich 7203, fol. (1806, col. 2, by
turban, the strip of cloth of which a turban is made,
and head-cloth. In Orient 2441, fol. 3716, col. I, we
<pb n="264"/>coming into the village as if he had journeyed thither
from a place some distance off, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="124"/> and because
of his weariness he sat down in the temple there.
And a man, exceedingly glorious, stood up above him,
and answered and said to him, "Behold, since thou
art weary and fatigued, rest thyself from thy labour
and trouble in this temple;" and taking the dress of
ministration off from him, he said to him, "Sleep now
until I call thee." Now in his youth he did not under-
stand this vision, but when he had received the office
of chief priest, he remembered the dream and meditated
upon it. And when Rabban Simon, the holy teacher
who finally became Bishop of Beth Beghâsh,' was
building the temple of the village of Shalmath of stones
and lime, the holy Mâr Aḥâ came according to his
custom to visit that village like the others. And he
passed the night in the temple there, while it was yet
unfinished, and a vision was shewn unto him twice,*
the first time dimly, but the second time exceedingly
clearly; but what manner of vision it was I have never
learned. And on the morrow, when that holy teacher
went to him he asked, "How much hast thou spent
upon this temple?" and Mâr Simon said, "I have spent
so much and so much." Mâr Aḥa said to him, "How
much more then, according to what the builders say,
have the same explanation with the addition of
veil, (-
head-cloth,
_ 50%, coudápiov), and refe-
rence is made to the passage in Genesis xxxviii. 19,
-7hp. In the Book of Para — ܫܘܫܦܟ where ܘܫܘܫܦܟ ܘܚܘܛܪܐ ܕܒܐܝܕܟ
-
a
napkin
which Roman ladies wound round ܢܨܝܦܐ ܝ ܫܘܫܦܐ dise
their heads." See the quotation in Payne Smith, Thes., col.
2442.
* See supra, p. 236, note 2.
.ܬܪܬܝܢ ܙܒܢܝܢ Read 2
<pb n="265"/>
will be required to finish it?" and he said to him, "So
much." And Mâr Aḥá brought out the money from his
purse, and gave to him, and answered and said, "It
hath been pointed out to me by the Lord that I shall
end my transitory life in this temple, and that it shall
be to me a place of rest until the revelation of our
Lord." And the teacher answered joyfully' and said
to him, "Thou hast announced exceedingly joyful tidings
to me, that in this temple which is built by us both,
we shall [both] be buried' until the day of the reve-
lation of the Raiser of the dead." <pb type="textAllignment"  n="125"/> The Metro-
politan said to him, "Not so, for thou buildest, but I
shall inherit." Rabban Simon said to him, "How?" The
Metropolitan said, "There is another temple in which
thou shalt be buried, viz., in the Monastery of Bâi,³
which is in the country of Beth Bĕghâsh, for thou
shalt be appointed bishop by the governor who shall
come after me, and there shalt thou finish the allotted
course of thy life." And thus did it come to pass
according to the word of the holy Mâr Aḥâ, for after
his death the blessed Maran-ammeh, Bishop of Salâkh,
succeeded him, and he made Mâr Simon Bishop of
Beth Beghash; and after three years he ended his life,
and was laid in the church of Bai, the seat of the
Bishops of Beth Beghash. Now I learned these things
from Râmâ, an old and venerable deacon of the church
of the village of Shalmath, and from Már Íshő-zěkhâ,
him of whom we have written previously," who was
Reading with Vat.
3 See Hoffmann, Auszüge. p. 227, and supra, p. 236, note 2.
+ The last few lines of this chapter are quoted in B. O., iii. 1,
p. 481, col. 2.
5 Chapter XXXII. see supra, p. 241.
11
<pb n="266"/>consecrated Metropolitan of the church of Salâkh by
Mår John, who died in peace, and in whose room Mår
Aha appointed another, Mår Måran-ammeh.
CHAPTER XL.
OF ABBA ḤANANYA, WHO ATE VEGETABLES AND PASTURED
WITH ANIMALS, AND WHO LIVED IN THIS MONASTERY IN
THE TIME OF THE HOLY MAR AḤÂ.'
Now I came to this holy monastery when I was a
young man, in the two hundred and seventeenth year
of the era of the dominion of the Arabs, [before any]
of these histories had been written by me.' And I
used to listen to the histories of certain of the holy
men, and by reason, of the fervour which burned in
me I used to make enquiries concerning them, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="126"/>
and to learn about each one of them from the old men
who were to be found here. Now therefore the vener-
The first seven lines of this chapter are quoted in B. O., iii. 1,
p. 464. col. 1.
Read with Vat.
The words are corrupt, and should probably
ܒܫܢܬ ܡܐܬܝܢ ܘܫܒܥܣܪܐ ܠܣܝܩܘܡ ܡܠܟܘܬܐ be omitted. Assemani has
seems to be wanting ܩܕܡ but some word like ,ܕܛܝܐ ܕܗܠܝܢ ܡܫܪ
may be part of a clause ܠܩܕܡ ܡܐܬܝܢ The words .ܕܗܠܝܢ before
in which Thomas stated in years of the Christian era how long
ago it was that he came to Bêth 'Abhê, or began to write,
or we might even translate them "[about] two hundred and...
years ago." A. H. 217-A. D. 832. -σńкwμa, reckoning,
era of Alexander, and an
era
— ܣܝܩܘܡ ܝܘܝܰܐ .era. Cf
of our Lord, and see the passages quoted in Payne Smith,
Thes., col. 2719.
<pb n="267"/>
able elder Rabban Matthew,' who had had as master
a very old and venerable man whose name was Abba
Mâran-zěkhâ, and whose cell was, as I learned from
him, in the days of his youth near Gâr Kâhnê, used
to say to me from time to time, "Come with me and
I will shew you the cave of Abbá Mâran-zěkhá;” and this
same Rabban Matthew informed me concerning Rabban
Mâr isho zěkhâ, who became bishop of our native
country. And when I was rehearsing before him the
wonderful things which had happened to us in Salâkh
through him, not knowing that he had lived in this
monastery, he said to me, "This Bishop whose glorious
acts thou art relating, came from this monastery, and
his cell is in Gâr Kâhnê. And he had near him in
Gâr Kâhnê, in a little cave, a certain companion who
was surnamed '‘Abbâ Ḥananya of the wild goats.'
And according to what I learned from my venerable
* Compare chap. XXXII, supra, p. 240.
2 I. c., Salâkh.
3 The b, or 25 is the capra Caucasica described by
Ainsworth in Fnl. Geogr. Soc., 11. 27, which is sculptured at
Gunduk, and which I myself have seen many times near the
Sinjâr mountains, and between Môșul and Al-Ķôsh. The Arabic
-and the Assyrian tu-ra الماعز الجبلي - تارخ form of the word is .
u. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, note 133, p. 18; Dozy, Supplé-
ment, col. 144; and Nöldeke, Z.D.M.G., Bd. xxxiii. p. 331. Tu-ra-hu
is the Assyrian rendering of the Accadian DA. RA. See Raw-
linson. Cuneiform Inscriptions of Western Asia, i. pl. 15, col. VII,
1. 6; ii. pl. 6, 1. 10c; iii. pl. 70, l. 51; v. pl. 50, 1. 466; Strass-
maier, Alphabetisches Verzeichniss, No. 9050, p. 1116; and
Bruno, A Classified List, No. 2947, p. 139. Brit. Mus. MS.
Orient 2441, fol. 3976, col. I has (53T -5913) 2020 Dom
.In Brit. Mus ܬܪܐ ܗ. ܬܪܘܚܐ ܕܪܟܝܬܲܐ ܐܠܟܫܟ jackal,” and" ܬܪܘܚܐ ܗ.
MS. Rich 7203, fol. 207 a, col. 1.
<pb n="268"/>4
master Mâran-zěkhâ, the life of his master was extended*
until he reached a very, very old age, and once a
week or fortnight he used to carry him [on his back]
as if he had been a bundle and bring him to partake
of the sacrament. And the manner of life of this old
man was, according to what I have learned, that he
had neither fence nor door [to his cell], nor a place
for retreat, nor anything, except that vegetable food³
upon which, with a little bread, of which he ate in
small portions and very sparingly, he lived. But like
the ostrich which hath neither nest, nor cover, and
which leaveth her eggs on the warm sand without care,
according to the natural instinct which the Creator of
the universe hath implanted in her, so also was the
life of that old man, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="127"/> worthy of all good things.
And at night while wandering in the wilderness, and
passing the night with wild animals on the tops of
the hills, by reason of his weariness and watching and
labour, he used to prepare a little place and to lie
down with them. Now the animals had had experience
Read, with Vat., .
-
more correctly. See Hoffmann, Syrisch-
Arabische Glossen, No. 4886, page 1ço.
3-morning meal,-,, food,
Brit. Mus. MS. Rich 7203, fol. 198a, col. 2.
* The reading of BC
for it is connected either with
is perhaps to be preferred here,
demensum, σιτOµéτpiov (Lukexii.
42), or See Payne Smith, Thes., coll 3276, 3279; and
Bezold, Zeitschrift für Assyriologie, Bd. ii. p. 46ff.
5 More correctly-Job xxxix. 13. In
Awşâr Râze Bar-Hebraeus explains the word: -
is
ܢܪܚܬܐ ܗ̇ܝ ܗܢܕܘܝܬܐ ܕܛܒ ܥܫܝܢܐ. ܘܡܢ ܐܢܪ̈ܝܢ ܨܦܪ ܦܝܠܐ ܡܬܩܪܝܐ. ܒܕܚܛܦܐ ܠܒܢܝ ܦܝܠܐ
51230
<pb n="269"/>
of him and they did not flee away from him, as in
the case of that blessed man of whom it is written in
the [Book of] Paradise, "He prayed to God that the
beasts might be at peace with him, and it was so."
And again, "He prayed that the fire might also be at
peace with him, and it was to him even as [he had
prayed]. And he used to gather sticks of wood, and
set fire to them, and go up and sit upon them." For
when the heart of a holy man³ is cleansed from these
five kinds of sin, namely, the love of money, and glut-
tony, and the lust of the body, and anger, and pride,
these five brethren' who were with that rich man who
was suffering tortures in hell, even as one of the saints
made the comparison, all creation will be found to be
friendly to him, both irrational animals and noxious
reptiles; even as we may learn from the histories of
holy men, as for example, that of the blessed old man
Simon' who was ministered unto by a lion; and that
anchorite in the history of the triumphant Már Milles®
with whom a serpent lived, and whom it did not hurt,
who made the angels his companions and helpers. But
* For accounts of the lions who were friendly with Macarius,
the serpents who were at peace with Paul, and the hyaenas
among whom Pachon lived, see Rosweyde, Vitae Patrum,
pp. 228, 650, and 732.
2 See Rosweyde, Vitae Patrum, p. 469, col. I, about the middle.
ܕܒܟܬ Read 3
4 The allusion is to "For I have five brethren". St. Luke xvi. 28.
5 I. e., a comparison between the five brethren and the five
sins here named.
6 Read So.
7 Probably the Simeon Priscus of Rosweyde, Vitae Patrum,
p. 809.
8 See B. O., ii. 1, p. 51, and compare Rosweyde, Vitac
Patrum, p. 39b.
<pb n="270"/>why should I speak of angels since he was the abode
of the Trinity, the Lord of the worlds? Now this
blessed man, according to what we have learned, they
sustained in this monastery, so that for the sake of
his love for God, he loved the food of animals and
their companionship and their habitations.
And he was
also accustomed, according to what is said of him, each
morning, which was the season of the day in which
he took his food, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="128"/> to light a fire, and to boil water
and to pour it upon the roots and over the dry crusts
of bread with which he used to sustain his life. Now
this was his food, and this was the season of the day
in which he partook of it; but whether this was actually
the case or whether he did this wishing either to
conceal his manner of life or to be held of no account,
I have neither been able to understand, nor have those
who related this to me been able to decide. And his
neighbours being stirred up with anger and burning
with wrath, said, "How can this most aged man
lengthen out his life in prodigality?" Now from the
mere sight of the fire did they come to this conclusion,²
but of what his food consisted, and of what he had
within his cave they knew nothing. And every time
they came to the monastery³ they repeated their re-
Read the allusion being to the angels.
2 The offence of which this old man seems to have been
guilty in the sight of the other monks was that he ate a meal
cooked by fire in the morning. Strict monks ate once a day,
in the evening, and they believed that the passions of the body
could not be subdued if food were eaten oftener. Not under-
standing his manner of life they appear to have assumed that
he ate a meal both evening and morning, and considering
this to be a bad example for the other monks they reported
the matter to Mâr Ahâ.
.ܒܚܝܪܬܐ Read 3
<pb n="271"/>
proaches against that old man and complained of him,
saying, "The proximity of this old man leadeth us
down and bringeth us to the depth of a lax and dis-
solute manner of life." And once, the holy Mâr Aḥâ the
Metropolitan having consented, they brought before him
an accusation against that holy old man, and he answered
and said to them, "Go ye after him and bring him
[here], but take heed that he doth not flee from you."
And when they heard this they leapt up [the moun-
tain] with light footsteps, and they came up with him
and laid their hands upon him, and one of them took
his turban, and threw it over his neck, while the others
pulled it down from behind,' saying in a scoffing
manner," "O foolish old man, how long shall we bear
reproaches for thy sake? Didst thou³ not know that
justice would at length rise up in judgment against
thee? Hasten thy steps, for the judge awaiteth thee."
And without answering them a single word he drew
near and came to the spring which we call 'Rabban's
Spring', <pb type="textAllignment"  n="129"/> and he saw round about it a flock
of wild goats, and he said to them, "Peace [be] with
you, O dwellers in the wilderness, children and com-
panions of my habitation! While we were living together
in peace ye did not deny my fellowship with you,
neither did ye set yourselves afar off from my com-
pany. Behold, I am justly taken captive by the righteous,
because like you, I eat my meal in the morning; now
since your [manner of] life and food is the same as
mine, come and let us go together to the judgment
I. e., one seized the old man's turban, unrolled it, and
threw it over his neck while the others dragged it down behind
like a cowl.
ܗܘܝܬ Read 3
2 N
a rare word.
حميد منية For +
<pb n="272"/>chamber, so that when the judge seeth that we are
many, he may spare us. because of our number, for
it might happen that he would not shew mercy upon
one despised creature; come then in the name of the
Lord." Now while the brethren marvelled at these
words which were not those of a demoniac,* and [saw]*
the animals, which came running towards him, lifting
up their feet and wagging their tails on all sides round
about him like dogs when they see their masters afar
off, surround³ that holy man, they let go their hands
from him, and entreated his pardon for what they had
thought; and when they had knelt down and prostrated
themselves before him and had risen up they could
not see him at all, and thus he passed out of their
hands, and where he went and where he died until
this day no man knoweth. And when the brethren
came to the Metropolitan in grief and sorrow and shame-
facedness of conscience which.rebuked them, and made
known to him what had happened, he was exceedingly
angry with them, and he answered and said to them,
"While the other monks who were your predecessors
in the place in which ye live, made that holy old man
the type and pattern of all correctness of life, and took
refuge from all their trials and temptations in his prayers,
and were delivered, you who come after them, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="130"/>
and who dwell in the caves and desert of holy men,
hath Satan stirred up with a foolish and empty
zeal, that he may not allow you to look upon the
correct lives of holy men in a proper manner. It is
rather to the injury of your own souls and to the shame
of your understanding, that ye have bespattered pious.
.dauovnZöuvog — ,ܪܝܘܐ i. e., one possessed of a ,ܪܝܘܠܵܐ
.ܘܚܪܘ ܠܚܝܟ̈ܬܐ Read -
ܚܕܪܘܗܝ Read 3
<pb n="273"/>
and blessed men with blemishes. But God our Lord
will require of you the priceless pearl which ye have
destroyed out of this monastery by your error. More-
over ye ought to be ashamed of all this wickedness
which ye have wrought, in going to the place of the
little hut where he lived, and prying into the manner
in which he prepared his food. I, however, warned
you away from there, saying, Take heed that he doth
not escape out of your hands; and I urged him to
work many great and divine things before you to put
you to shame, the like of which no man has ever
wrought in our time."
CHAPTER XLI.
OF THE BLESSED MÂRAN-ZĚKHA, BISHOP OF FADHATTA AND
OF THE BISHOP WHO PASTURED CAMELS [WHOM HE
FOUND].
Now when the holy Metropolitan Mâr Aḥâ was
sitting on the holy throne of the church of the city of
Hadhattâ, the pious and glorious and blessed Bishop
Mâran-zěkhâ, the disciple and fellow-worker of Rabban
Aphni-Maran, was accustomed on the holy days of the
fast of our Lord to go out and pass them in silence
The site of this city is marked by Keshaf,
near Sulțân 'Abd'ullah, which is situated on the left or east
bank of the Tigris one farsal below the Upper or Great Zâb.
حديثة الموصل وهي بليدة كانت على دجلة بالجانب الشرقي قرب
Yâķût ii. p. 222. See also Hoffmann, Auszüge,
p. 178; and Ritter, Erdkunde, ii, p. 665, note 2, and p. 669.
2 See Feige, Die Geschichte des Mar 'Abhdîsho, p. 57.
mm
<pb n="274"/>in the mountain of the village of Zinai.' <pb type="textAllignment"  n="131"/> And
once when he was journeying along the road to that
mountain, he saw the figure of a man standing on the
top of a hill with his face turned towards the east; 2
and as he drew near to it,-now he was to the west
of that person, he heard him raising3 [his voice] in
the hymn of the Resurrection from the Communion
Service of the First day of the week, which beginneth,
"Come all ye peoples, let us move our lips," and little
by little he went up and came close to him. And
Mâran-zěkha, before he perceived that man, wondered
how this pasturer of camels was able to sing this
hymn which was so difficult that not every man was
capable of singing it, and where he had learned' it.
And when the holy Mâran-zěkhâ saw him he marvelled,
and cried out in the customary way, "Peace"; but that
blessed man answered him in Arabic, speaking in
barbarous language, wishing to disguise himself. And
* A village which cannot have been very far from Ḥadhattà.
It is mentioned supra, p. 108.
2 On worshipping towards the East see Badger, The Nes-
torians, vol. ii. p. 413.
3
means to sing, to praise. Cf. Hoffmann, Opus-
cula Nestoriana, p. 93, line 2 ff., where up ; and our
English use of the words "raise the song" in "Come, ye thankful
people, come, Raise the song of Harvest-home." Hymns Ancient
and Modern, No. 382, London 1875.
* I. e., the service for the holy Eucharist on Easter Sunday.
The lesson for the day is taken from the XXVIIIth chap. of
St. Matthew. See Brit. Mus. Add. 17, 923, fol. 92a, (Wright,
Catalogue, p. 184, no. 65), and B. O., iii. ii. p. CCCXXXII.
.ܐܠܗܢܐ Read 5
ܠܦ Read vith BC 7
9
6 Read p.
8
M
In Psalm cxiv. 1. 1
by-
a word used to express indistinct and hasty speech
as.
<pb n="275"/>
Bishop Máran-zékhá fell down before him and affirming
with oaths, said, "I will not rise up until thou dost
promise me that thou wilt not hide from me who thou
art," and straightway the pasturer of camels said angrily
to him in Arabic, "Rise up, master, what hast thou to
do with me? depart in peace from my place." And
Már Mâran-zěkhâ protested to him with an oath, saying,
"If thou shouldst kill me I will not rise up until thou
tellest me thy history. If thou art an Arab' as thou
sayest [by thy speech], where didst thou learn this
hymn of the Resurrection of our Lord which very few
men are found to have ability enough to sing? and
why were thy arms and face turned towards the east?"
And when that holy man heard these things, and saw
that he had been snared by his singing the hymn and
the oath which that holy man had laid upon himself,
he answered and said to him, "Swear to me, yea or
nay, that if I do this I shall not be honoured in thine
eyes, and that thou wilt not come to me continually,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="132"/> and that thou wilt send nothing to me." Now
this he said knowing that he should speedily depart
from this world as soon as any man perceived him.
And he answered, saying, “Behold, Master, forty years
ago I was appointed Bishop of the Scattered who were
in the land of Egypt.³ And when I had ministered in
قوم یا راهب ما لى ولك مر بسلام من مكاني :
3
-
"an Arab". Compare Hoffmann, Opuscula
Nestoriana, p. 95, line 6, and see Thomas of Margà, p. 133,
1. 17 (text).
3 All the MSS. read so, but it is very doubtful if
Thomas of Margâ refers to Egypt, where rain is not expected
to fall regularly. Hoffmann thinks it more probable that the
or country round about Damascus is referred to,
<pb n="276"/>this office a short time, a scarcity of rain took place
there, and I gathered together the believers, and I
went forth [with them] to the desert to make suppli-
cation and entreaty to God. And those Arabs who
dwell in tents came and surrounded me, and while
every one else escaped, I remained because I thought
that they would do me no harm; and they took me
captive and brought me to their tents, and appointed
me to be the shepherd of these camels which thou
seest. And since I have determined that this [work]
is the will of our Lord, and also that it does not in
anything separate me from a life of purity, and I am
not brought in contact with them [i. e., the Arabs],
but am alone by myself in the desert, I praise God
continually, and I remember that many of the saints
were shepherds, and I am comforted. And as for this
hymn which thou didst hear to-day, behold I am ac-
customed each day to perform the service of one
festival of the Lord, and to watch, and to-day I per-
formed the service of the Resurrection of our Lord,
and I lifted up my voice in the hymn as if I had been
standing in the temple before the altar of our Lord.
And now, behold, for forty years I have been as thou
for we know that the Nestorians who were scattered about
there had a bishop. See B. O., iii. 1, p. 107, col. I; and iii.
ii. p. CCCCXXXI. Or
may be a corruption of
, five farsaḥ south-west of Aleppo, to
the west of Ķinneshrin and north of Idlib. See Wright, Cata-
logue of Syriac MSS., fol. 1266; and Nöldeke, Zur Topographie
und Geschichte des Damascenischen Gebietes und der Haurân-
gegend, (in Z.D.M.G., Bd. XXIX. p. 420ff.) where the list of
places mentioned in Add. 14,602 is discussed.
I
Literally, "I have set it down."
<pb n="277"/>
seest me,
.
277
and our Lord hath protected me from
all evil, and [the Arabs] have accounted me as one of
their elders and as one of their brethren, because they
found me upright and obedient. And I have received
from them no compulsion to sin in any way; and I
wait for the end of my life, which shall be completed
according to the will of the Lord." Now when the
holy Mâran-zěkhâ heard these things, he wondered
greatly and marvelled, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="133"/> and he was moved to
tears, and that [other] holy man wept in company
with him. And he answered and said to him. "Master,
I will go back and bring money (zûze)' and will give
it [to thee] for thy deliverance, for I cannot leave thee
in this ignominious and lowly condition." And that
blessed man said to him, "Depart in peace to thy
manner of life and to thy quietness, Már Bishop, and
disturb not thyself with any of these things; for if
during the whole period of the time which has gone
by, I had wished either to escape or to sell myself,
I could have done it. And moreover, this [work] in'
which I am [occupied] is the will of God." And he
urged the Bishop, saying, "Go in peace; and on Palm
Sunday when thou goest down from the mountain to
thy city, thou shalt come to me and shalt see me."
And when the Bishop went again at dawn on the
Sunday aforesaid, he saw a man in the place of that
man, and thinking that it was he, he went up to him.
And when he had seen him and saluted him, he asked
him, "Where is the old man who pastured these camels
For the Babylonian original of this word see Bezold,
Oriental Diplomacy, p. 88, London, 1893.
2 Read? Or instead of "work" we may understand
"station" or "position in life."
<pb n="278"/>a short time ago?" And he said to him, "He is dead."
And the Bishop was grieved with a great and bitter
grief, and said to him, "When?" and he said to him,
"During these [last] days." And the Bishop took a
turban cloth from his body and gave to the man,
saying, "Take this, and go and shew me his grave, for
I am his friend." And when he had gone with him
and saw the grave afar off, the Bishop made the Arab
leave him, saying, “Go now to thy camels," so that
he might have the opportunity to weep. And he
sat down upon the grave, and wept bitterly, like the
widow who had buried her only son,' and he said;
"Alas, my brother; alas, my brother! Why didst thou
hide thy departure from me, and why didst thou not
permit me to enjoy the sight of thee, but didst send
me away from thee as the blessed Paul sent away
Abbâ Antonius?". And the blessed Mâran-zékhá rose
up and went to Ḥadhattâ, and kept the festival of
Palm Sunday according to custom.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="134"/> And on the second day of the week he invited
the assembly of the priests, and many believers, and
said unto them, “Come, let us go to the desert and
bring from there Elijah; come with me to the wilder-
Luke vii. 12.
2 The allusion here is to Saint Paul, the First Hermit, (see
supra, p. 30) who, when he felt that the time of his death was
drawing near, sent off Antony to fetch the cloak which Atha-
nasius, Bishop of Alexandria, had given him, in order that his
body might be wrapped therein for burial. Paul wished to be
left alone in prayer with God when the summons came. While
Antony was on his road to bring the cloak he saw the soul
of the blessed Paul being carried up to heaven by angels. See
Butler, Lives of the Saints, vol. 1. p. 185, Jan. 15, London 1812.
son."
<pb n="279"/>
ness that ye may see John the Baptist; come with me
and I will give you a holy body more excellent than
[those of] the prophets." Now when they had gone
forth in fear with that holy man their Bishop, and had
arrived at the place where the grave was, they began
to say the prayers and the service for any dead per-
And when they had performed the service of
the dead for a whole day and the night which followed
it, they began to dig up and uncover the grave, but
they did not find that holy body. Now they found
two woollen cloths," one which formed the clothing
which he put on, and the other the covering with
which he covered himself [at night], but he himself hath-
disappeared unto this day; and in all sorrow they took
these garments and went away having put the earth
of the grave back in its place. Hail to this pair of
holy men, for behold [this] our history is sanctified by
the account of them, and our simple speech by their
* For the use of oras in this sense see Payne Smith, Thes.,
col. 3292.
And see Wright, Catalogue of Syr. MSS., p. 257,
col. 1, No. 49; and p. 275, col. 2, No. 4, "The Commemoration
.ܕܥܠ ܚܕ ܩܢܘܡܐ "of any one Saint
.., two large pieces of plain or coloured cloth, one
of which wrapped around him served for clothes by day, and
the other formed the counterpane under which he slept at night.
According to Dozy, (Supplément, ii. p. 90) ts, or is,
properly speaking, the name of a kind of stuff. Compare
✓✓✓, the name of a stuff woven by the Arabs, or a large
piece of woollen stuff used both as a blanket and mantle. (Dozy,
Supplement, ii. p. 468). I have often seen the shepherds in
Mesopotamia wearing these large pieces of sheep's wool cloth,
and I have often been glad to borrow one from a member of
a caravan to sleep under during the night. For a couple of
hours they are proof against heavy rain.
<pb n="280"/>'
glory! [Hail to] this venerable yoke of holy men which
beareth upon its two shoulders the history of the holy
Mår Aḥa their fellow labourer; one of whom pastured
and made his habitation with the wild goats, and the
other pastured the camels and lived his life with them!
The children of men were unworthy to have near them
the bodies of these men who possessed neither bed,
nor pillow, nor seat, nor candlestick, nor table; the earth
was their bed, their knees were their tables, and herbs
were their food. The belly did not overcome them
by its greediness; lust did not set them on fire with
its ticklings; the blanket³ of sickness never weighed
them down; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="135"/> they never needed the medicines
of the children of Galen because of the weight of their
luxurious and dainty food. No Eve ever visited them
and used her blandishments upon them; they never
tasted the [fruit of the] forbidden fig tree' which is
sweet to the palate of the children of Adam; they
never sweated behind the plough in the toilsome labour
which bringeth forth thorns; they never offered their
offerings in the neighbourhood of a Cain to be envied
and slain; they never drank wine and exposed their
shame' and became a mockery unto a Canaan which
was [only to be] perceived by the mind, for their
ܣܦܟܝܐ Neo-Syr( ܒܣܝܘܐ The plur. fem .ܒܪܕܝܐ - ܒܤܕܝܐ *
Heb. л Ezek. xiii. 18.
2
.ܬܘܪܣܝܗܘܢ for ܬܘܪܟܲܝܗܘܢ
-
3 Arab., a soft coverlet or rug with fringed
edges. See Dozy, Supplément, p. 406, col. 2.
4 Genesis iii. 12.
6 Genesis iv. 8.
8
5 Genesis iii. 3. 4.
7 Genesis ix. 21.
cf. Payne Smith, Thes, col. 1562.
<pb n="281"/>
upon
drink was water; they never brought burnt brick' to
the building of the Tower of Pride which was formed*
by the agreement of senseless builders; they never saw
the scourge³ of confusion; 4 and they who pastured
with the gazelles upon the mountain top instead of
the top of that haughty tower fled from before
the punishment. All these things [did they not do] by
reason of the hope which is to come, in which although
they saw it not yet they believed, and although
it was afar off yet they accounted it to be near. They
have a righteous One Who will reward them, and
Who will recompense them in His world, not according
to their -[merits], but according to Himself, and to
Whose reward all sufferings and all pains are not to
be [accounted] equal; may He make us to be partakers
with them in His joy through their prayers, Amen.
CHAPTER XLII.
OF THE BLESSED MÅR SERGIUS, BISHOP OF HENÂITHÂ.5
6
Now when the holy Már Dindowai, Bishop of
Ma'allthâ, who had been ordained Metropolitan by the
holy Mâr John, departed
this trouble-bearing life, the
In allusion to Genesis xi. 3.
-лелλασμévos. Cf. Bernstein in Z.D.M.G., Bd. iii,
p. 407; and Budge, Book of the Bee, p. 3, 1. 21 (ó Uµl).
-σкÛTO, literally, the leather whip with which boys
3
were chastised.
In there is an etymological allusion to the name
Babel.
See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 216.
Or Dêndowai.
nn
<pb n="282"/>blessed Mar Aḥâ appointed as his successor the vener-
able Sergius, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="136"/> a monk and ascetic from this
congregation, who was trained in the Scriptures, and
who was enlightened in the understanding of them: And
he pastured his flock piously with all the humility which
befits the governors of the flocks of Christ; and during
some small disturbance which took place in his country
through a raid of the inhabitants of Dêlom' who came
to Salâkh and Ḥěnáithâ, he took all his books and
came here, hoping for the repose of peace and of
refreshing of spirit; and thus being insufficient for that
which was expected [from him], he ended his life, and was
also laid in this monastery of the house of his fathers.
2
CHAPTER XLIII.
OF HUGAIR THE BELIEVING NOBLEMAN, AND OF THE
MONASTERY WHICH HE BUILT.
There was a believing man, whose name was Ḥûgair
who belonged to a noble family. And he built a mon-
astery between the village of Bâshosh and Shalmath, 3
not with a godly will and intention, but rather for
boasting and pride. And wishing to emulate good and
prosperous men, he named the monastery by the Persian
name of "Hugair-Âbâd." after the manner of the Magians
from whose race he had sprung. Now when he had
* See Hoffmann, Auszüge, note 1640; Nöldeke, Geschichte
der Perser, pp. 167, 478, 484; and infra, Bk. v. chap. 4.
2 The MSS. have Hugîr.
3 See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 224.
<pb n="283"/>
made it ready with all things, he wished it to be con-
secrated by the holy Mar Aḥa, and he waited for the
time of his coming to this country; and when he had
come Hûgair entreated him to take the trouble to go up
with the teachers and scholars, and to sanctify the
monastery which he had built. But the holy Metro-
politan Mâr Aḥ saw with the eye of the spirit that
the Lord desired not this any more than the sacrifices
to idols, and he answered and said to all those who
were near, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="137"/> "This Monastery of Ḥûgair-Âbâd is
ruined while it is yet new;" and he left it in its un-
consecrated condition, and departed. And it was not
consecrated afterwards, neither did the praise of the
glorious Trinity ascend in it, and the remains of its
building are well known and stand to this day.
CHAPTER XLIV.
OF THE DEPARTURE OF THE BLESSED METROPOLITAN MÅK
AHA FROM [THIS] TEMPORARY LIFE.
Now I was preparing to add [to the history of]
the noble deeds of the holy Mâr Aha [some account]
of the excellent work which he did in the Church of
God in respect of the two Patriarchs who lived in his
days, I mean the Catholicus Sûrîn,' and the Catholicus
Sûrîn seized upon the patriarchate A. H. 1065 - A. D.
754 and held it for fifty-six days. "He sat after Mâr Abhà, and
came from Seleucia. He was not guarded in his manner of
life. He was formerly Metropolitan of Nisibis, but was trans-
lated to Halwan (i. c.,
Calah). He was deposed
in the year in which a Catholicus was appointed". Bar-Hebraeus,
-
<pb n="284"/>Jacob, and of how he went down with his Bishops,
and of how, by his firmness and the fair fame of his
life, he abolished the blameworthy Surin from being
Catholicus, and confirmed Jacob, and of how he shewed
his tact and skill in such a way that no man could stand
before him. But inasmuch as these things concerning him
are set down in the writings of others, and as, moreover,
Chron. Eccles., ii. col. 155, and see B. O., iii. 1, p. 616. According
to 'Abhd-isho (B. O., ii. 1, p. 168) he wrote
wh
-The Catholics who were de ܒܩܘܛܥ ܡܡܠܠܐ ܝܘܢܝܐ ܘܬܚܪܝܬܐ ܘܒܘܚܢܐ
posed were Mår(i)-bókht, Narsai, Elisha, Joseph and Sûrîn or
Sôrên; see Budge, Book of the Bee, p. 120.
■"Then arose Jacob and was appointed Catholicus in Seleucia,
after the bishops had received from him an undertaking in
writing that he would neither trangress the law nor abrogate
the canon. In his days a church for the Nestorians was built
at Tågrith (Tekrit) by the care of Selibhâ-zékhá, Bishop of
Tirhan, who had been cast in prison with Jacob the Catholicus.
And when he was set free he began to restore the churches in
Ţîrhân, and he also went to Paul the Maphrian at Tekrit and
persuaded him to give permission for the Nestorians to build
themselves a church in Tekrit. The Maphrian said, 'As far as
I myself am concerned I have no objection, but I am afraid of
the Patriarch and of the people of Tekrit. I counsel thee, how-
ever, to go to Nisibis and to persuade the Nestorians there to
give back to the Jacobites the churches which they have taken
from them, for then will the people of Tekrit allow a church
to be built for you here.' And when Selîbhâ-zekha had gone
to Nisibis, and had made supplication to the aged Metropolitan
Cyprian and to the Nestorians of Nisibis, they gave back to
our people the famous Church of Mår Domitius. And ten
Jacobite merchants who were in Nisibis went down to Tekrit,
and persuaded the people to allow a church to be built for the
Nestorians." Bar-Hebraeus, Chron. Eccles., . coll. 155, 157. Jacob
sat nineteen years, and died A. D. 773. See B. O., ii. p. 432;
iii. 1, pp. 205, 616.
<pb n="285"/>
we had formerly the intention to speak briefly about
him as about his companions, I have passed over all
these [as] extraneous matters, and come therefore to
speak of the mournful end of his days. Now when
he had arrived at the village of Shalmath on his visita-
tion, he knew and felt also that he had arrived at the
limit of the silence of his life, and through a short
illness to which corporeal beings are subject, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="138"/>
he like the [other] children of Adam lay down and slept
the sleep of death. And according to the revelation
and visions which had been upon him in his youth
and old age, his venerable body was laid in that holy
temple which is in this village. And he was a haven
of help to all those who took refuge therein, and may
God the Lord of all, through his prayers order that
we also like him may depart from this world with fair
renown, while lifting up praise to the Father, and the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, now and always and for
ever! Amen.
Here endeth the Second Book.
<pb n="286"/>
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="139"/>
BOOK III.
THE AUTHOR'S APOLOGY TO THE BELIEVING AND HONOURABLE
ḤASÂN.
Now the blessed brethren of the monastery of Bêth
'Âbhê have completely set aside and made to slip from
out of the fingers of our history the account of the
holy Mâr Mâran-ammeh,' the Metropolitan Bishop of
Adiabene, and it hath not been embodied in our feeble
lines because they exhorted me to crown with my dis-
course only such holy men as have lived in that holy
monastery, and to omit [all] others. But this is not
pleasing in thy sight, and by thy divine command thou
hast required of me that I should also compose a
history of that blessed man, and set down in writing
an account of him based upon that which is handed
down by word of mouth, that it may be joined to the
equipage of the histories of the governors who lived
See infra, p. 304 ff.
ܓܫܝܡܘܬ and ܓܫܝܡܘܬ ܡܠܐ .Cf |ܝ ,embodiment ܓܫܡܘܬܐ -
✓ Payne Smith, Thes., col. 794.
3 . This very rare word is explained in Hoffmann, Opus-
cula Nestoriana, p. 96, 1. 1f. by
e Ação
the arrangement in order ܡܪܟܒܐ ܠܚܕܐ ܘܒܠܟܬܗܝܢ ܝܗܒܢ ܩܠܐ ܐܝܟ ܕܪܓܐ
of the furniture of chariots by means of which the chariots
follow each other closely and give forth sounds like a bell as
they move along." In Judges v. 28
(Neo-Syr.
<pb n="287"/>
before and after him, ○ most noble Mâr Hasan, beloved
member of Christ, ready adorer of His glorious cross,
chosen freeman, son and heir of the mighty one of
God, worthy of all praise, beautiful in his majesty and
in his various acts, Mår Sabhr-İsho', Governor of Adia-
bene and Athôr, who, behold, exchanged his [earthly]
wealth and possessions, for heavenly riches, that he
might go and inherit the life of happiness in the king-
dom above with the true believers, and who measured
the steps of his course of life that he might tread in
their footprints. I have already praised you, and I
will praise you again, ☐ wise and understanding men,
in that being completely involved with things of this
world, and with wealth which is a stumbling-block to
others <pb type="textAllignment"  n="140"/> and the cause and substance of all
wickedness, ye made [your wealth] subject to none of
these things, but ye humbled it and made it subject
unto you, that it might not be a god to you as it is
to the foolish and wicked, but that ye might be its
master. 3 It is to be marvelled at, I repeat, that being
as thou art in the prime of early manhood, yet behold
)
.פּעֲמֵי מַרְכָּבוֹתָיו -
In addition to the native
explanations of the word given in Payne Smith, Thes., coll. 1140,
اجراص الخيل ويقال صرير المراكب اصطفاف المراكب Duval gives 1141
jojo
2
Lexicon Bar-Ballule, col. 694.
Lit., 'limb of Christ."
- βασιλεία -
Duval, Lexicon, col. 408.
3 "its gods." This custom of calling a man of rank
"my gods" is as old as 1500 years before Christ for in the
Tell el-Amarna tablets the writers of despatches frequently ad-
dress Amenophis as "my gods" ilâni-ja. See Bezold and Budge,
The Tellel-Amarna Tablets in the British Muscum, p. LXI, note 1.
- In Bar-Bahlûl 2 = shall do:
see Duval, Lexicon, col. 276.
axun — ܪܩܪܐ 4
<pb n="288"/>thou art standing on the highest point of the ladder
of knowledge of the wise like an old man,' and art
inciting me to collect the stories, and pieces of infor-
mation, and the triumphs of holy men, that thy soul
may pleasantly meditate upon them, and that thou
mayest make it to possess a pattern and an example
of spiritual things, and mayest enrich it with the under-
standing which is above this world. Now the abundant
virtues and the good and glorious qualities which are
stored up and which flourish in thy noble self compel³
me, with great regard to thy distinguished command,
to paint for thee in writing³ a picture of the glorious
acts and deeds of that man worthy of all good things,
the Metropolitan Bishop Mâr Mâran-ammeh. At the
same time also, according to thy wish I will write
briefly concerning the coming of the blessed and enlight-
ened teacher, Mâr Bâbhai, to this country, and of the
schools which he founded. And I will set down in
consecutive order what I have learned from the Elders
I whom I have met, and from these things which are
already written down, and I entreat and supplicate God
the Lord of all to manifest His working in me the
ignorant and unlearned,' and may the praise of His
Godhead increase in the mouth of the reader, and
in the ears of the listeners, through those things which
are about to be written! And may the help and
blessings of His grace cling to thee, as the cause of,
and as the one who encouraged the writing of the
* Read ?
2 All the MSS. read
3 Literally, "that I should make thy glorious command in
writing, and that I should paint for thee a picture."
.ܠܝܦܐ Read 5
.ܘܡܢ ܐܝܠܝܢ Read ܀
<pb n="289"/>
histories of those who loved Him, and who did His
will. First of all, however, as thy wisdom requireth,
we will speak concerning the blessed Rabban Bâbhai,
and of the schools which he founded, and of his restora-
tion of those which had fallen into decay for want of
teachers and of people to care for them. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="141"/> And after-
wards I will rehearse in plain language my history of the
noble acts of his disciple, the chief priest, Mâr Mâran-
'ammeh, and though omitting to introduce the proofs which
the chapters require, so that I may not make the history
too heavy, I will glorify them by brief accounts, even
as I have praised their companions in short narratives.
Here endeth the Apology.
CHAPTER I.'
OF THE BLESSED TEACHER RABBAN BABHAI.
The holy teacher Rabban Bâbhai was a very enlight-
ened man, and through the healthy constitution of his
body, and the knitting together of his limbs, he was
a powerful man, and according to what is said of him,
had a high, sweet voice like a trumpet. And there
clave to him chastity, purity, love, graciousness, humility
and exceeding lowliness, and he excelled in [these] last
times by reason of these his glorious qualities like the
teachers who lived' in the former generations. And
the multitude of his virtues magnified his name, and
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 177, col. If.
Read oop.
00
<pb n="290"/>all the rules and arrangements of the schools which
through laxity and neglect had been destroyed, were
restored by him, and through him [the schools] regained
their former glory. He came from a family in the
town of Gebhîltâ' in the country of Ţirhân, where
first of all he laboured in spiritual work, and he begat
prosperous children who followed in the footsteps of
their parent, and who showed themselves noble heirs
of a wise father. It is found that the period in which
he lived was in the days of Şĕlîbhâ-zěkhâ, Catholicus
and Patriarch, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="142"/> and the “Questions"³ of Rabban
Bâbhai testify that he made enquiries of Şelibhâ-zĕkhâ*
concerning various matters. And just as among the
people of Israel who were in Babylon the Divine praises
had fallen into oblivion' and were forgotten, 6 because
according to what is written, they did not know how
to perform the praises of the Lord in a strange land,'
a town in Ţîrhàn, was situated on the east
bank of the Tigris, about eighteen miles from Karh Samarrà
on the road to Môşul. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 188.
2 Read 2. e. Tirhan was a district which is
represented to-day by the country round about Samarrà, ex.
See Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 188-191; and B. O., iii. 11, p. 785.
3 In the list of his works given in B. O., iii. 1, p. 181, no
.ܫܐܠܐ mention is made of these
* According to Elias bar-Shînàyâ he sat from A. D. 713-
729; Assemânî gives (B. O., ii. 430) 714-728. Şelîbhâ-zékhá
came from Karkhâ dhe Pêrôz, "which is called to-day Karkhânê
(Karkhênê), from the country of Ţîrhan". See Bar-Hebraeus,
Chron. Eccles., ii. col. 149.
5, "things fallen into oblivion." A rare word.
6 -.
7 The allusion appears to be to Psalm cxxxvii. 4, "How
shall we sing the Lord's song in a strange land?"
<pb n="291"/>
even so in the days of the holy Rabban Bábhai
were confounded' all the tunes,' and melodies, and
The following difficult passage is thus rendered by Asse-
mâni, B. O., iii. 1, p. 180, col. 1:-"ita pariter temporibus Sancti
Magistri nostri Babaei confusi fuisse videbantur ritus Ecclesiastici
sacrarum processionum, et Cantus, modi, et hirmi, et psalmodia
universa ea, quae ad Psalmum, Domine clamavi ad te, peragi
solet; necnon et clausulae precum, et psalmorum modulationes,
et stationes, et cantiones, et hymni, qui alta voce recitantur;
ita ut unaquaeque regio, urbs, coenobium, et schola suos haberet
canendi modos, et sacrarum supplicationum ritus. Quamobrem
factum fuerat, ut externus quisque, literis licet excultus et in
scholis exercitatus, extra propriam Scholam manere velut imper-
itus et rudis cogeretur. Et quemadmodum quum Judaei in
urbem. Hierusalem postliminio rediissent, universa psalmodia
restituta est, et pristinam gloriam recuperavit: et quemadmodum
ante Mar Jesujabum Catholicum Adjabenum sacrarum ordinati-
onum ritus confusi fuerant, illius autem operȧ et auctoritate
conveniens omnibus Ecclesiis ritus et communis factus est: simi-
liter Spiritus sanctus beatum hunc necessariâ sapientia instruxit,
docuitque modos suaves, et compositiones jucundas Ecclesi-
asticae musicae, suisque charismatibus implevit, et suis thesauris
locupletatum, suae doctrinae organum et spiritualem citharam
As in the early Christian Church the musical portion of
the service consisted of ψαλμοί, ὕμνοι, ᾠδαὶ πνευματικαί (Ephes
ians v. 19, Colossians iii. 16), but I am unable to give exact
renderings of the Syriac technical words. See the articles
ἀκροστίχια, ἀνατρίχισμα, εἱρμός, κανόνες, προψάλματα, φωνή,
τpоnápov, bη in Du Cange, Glossarium, coll. 45, 73, 356,
582, 1262, 1714, 1617, 1789.
* In the text p. 142, note 1, referring to this is the observation,
"See the confusions in the musical system which the much
enlightened Rabban Bábhai corrected."
Assemȧnigenerally considers that these were connected
with processions, but they seem rather to have been tunes with an oft
repeated refrain; cf. lg habis Payne Smith,
Thes., col. 1827; and see Bk. IV. chap. 20 (text, p. 237, 1. 17)
as according to Castell p. 812, is concentus, melodia,
<pb n="292"/>airs, and the signs and accents (?) and all the songs
which are sung [with the psalm which begins], "Lord,
I have called upon Thee,"³ and the final clauses of the
prayers, and the psalms which are dispersed throughout
the services, and the "stations"," and the antiphonal
and is rendered by Assemànî Cantus. Brit. Mus. MS. Orient.
2441, fol 330a, col. 2, explains it by “song" No as of lasan
, and in Rich 7205, fol. 152a, col. I non-
التفتفة الالحان
✓ rendered modi by Assemânî, and metra by Payne
Smith, Thes., col. 2367.
2 All the MSS. have s. Assemânî (B. O., iii. 1, p. 178,
1. 17) and Payne Smith (Thes., col. 2280) give, the
former rendering the word by hirmi, and the latter by hymni
species. In Cardahi, Al-Lobab, Beyrut, 1891, vol. ii. p. 97, col. 2.
اتفاق الاصوات في الغنا = عة لجن
3 Psalm CXLI.
4. c., the airs which are sung at the end of the
السياخين التي تقال في اخر صلاة الليل prayer for the night
.ܫܘܡܠܝܐ - ܣܘܝܪܐ .2551 .Payne Smith, Thes., col
5 7, strictly speaking, the psalms which are sung before
the reading of the Epistles, cf. прочáλμαтα (Du Cange, Glossar-
ium, col. 1262) and the ox of Badger, Nestorians, vol. ii. p. 20.
The reader should consult the sections Hirmos, Hauptformen,
Refrain, Akrostichis Reim, Gleichzeilige rythmische Gedichte,
in Krumbacher, Geschichte der Byzantinischen Literatur, Munich,
1891, pp. 334-344-
6 The Psalter in the Greek Church was divided into twenty
sections called кaеíσμатα, each of which was divided into three
Σtáσ, or "sic dictae, quod Stationes stantes recient
Graeci, vel quod Lectionem finientes stent et quasi respirant."
Du Cange, Glossarium, col. 1429.
The Psalms were thus
divided among the twenty καθίσματα:
καθ' Ι. Psalms 1-8.
2.
"
"
9-17.
3. Psalms 18-24-
кα
4.
"
25-32.
<pb n="293"/>
responses' and the anthems," and everything which is
recited by the voice. Each country, and town, and
monastery, and school had its own hymns and songs
of praise and tunes, and sang them in its own way,
and if a teacher or a scholar happened to be away
from his own school he was obliged to stand [silent]
like an ignorant man. And as when the Hebrews had
gone up to Jerusalem all their hymns and songs of
praise which had become corrupt acquired [new] glory
and splendour, or if thou wishest, as before the time
of Már Isho-yahbh of Adiabene³ the Catholicus, the
orders of the services were performed in a confused*
manner in every place, and by means of this man the
services of all the churches acquired connected order,
so also the Holy Spirit made wise this blessed man,
and taught him beautiful airs, and sweet blendings
of melody, and filled him with His gift, and enriched
him with His treasures, and made him a musical instru-
καθ' 5. Psalms 33-37.
кα 13. Psalms 92-101.
6.
"
"
38-46.
14.
"
102-105.
"
7.
"
47-55-
"
15.
"
106-109.
8.
"
"
56-64.
16.
"
"
110-118.
"
9.
"
65-70.
"
17.
"
119.
10.
"
71-77.
18.
"
120-132.
"
II.
"
78-85.
" 19.
"
133-143.
12.
"
"
86-91.
20.
"
"
144-150.
123, . ., antiphonal responses of all kinds sung by clergy
and laity.
2. e., small wudai sung as anthems, or uμvoi.
3 He sat from A. D. 647-658.
+
confusedly, indistinctly.
σúστηua, i. e., the art of singing in tune and
.ܘܐܠܦܗ Read ؛
6 No savais
in unison.
=====
<pb n="294"/>ment of His doctrine, and a spiritual harp. And he
became a father of teachers and a master of the wise,
and the Lord stirred up his heart like that of Zerub-
babel, and he placed Gěbhiltâ, and the schools which
were therein, in the hands of the prosperous disciples
whom he left there, and he went up and came to this
* Notwithstanding the labours of Gregory Nazianzenus
(born 329, died 390), of Romanos (VIth century), of Sergios
and Sophronios (VIIth century), and of Andrew, Archbishop
of Crete (650-720), John of Damascus (died before 754),
and his friend Kosmas of Jerusalem (he became Bishop
of Maiuma in Palestine about A. D. 743), "vir ingeniosissimus,
omnino musicam harmoniam spirans," must be regarded as the
founders of Greek church music, from which the Nestorians
I must have borrowed largely. A dissertation on this subject,
even if I possessed the knowledge necessary for writing it, would
be out of place here, but the following works should be con-
sulted by the reader who wishes to work out a comparison of
the Greek and Syriac technical names:-Vincent, 'Aionolins,
(in Notices et Extraits), Paris, 1847; Wallis, Manuel Bryennios;
Christ, Beiträge zur kirchlichen Literatur der Byzantiner, (in
Sitzungsberichte der Bayer. Akad., phil.-hist. Cl. 1870); Christ,
Ueber die Bedeutung von Hirmos, Troparion und Kanon in der
Griechischen Poesie, (in Sitzungsberichte der Bayer. Akad., phil.-
hist. Cl. 1870); Westphal, Metrik der Griechen; Tzetzes, Ueber
die altgriechische Musik in der griechischen Kirche, Munich
1874; Reimann, Zur Geschichte und Theorie der Byzantinischen
Musik; Χρύσανθος, Θεωρητικὸν μέγα τῆς μουσικῆς, Trieste, 1832;
Μαργαρίτης, Θεωρητικὴ καὶ πρακτικὴ ἐκκλησιαστική μουσική,
Constantinople, 1851; Φιλόξενος, Δεξικόν and Θεωρητικὸν
σtoixeiŵdes tĤs μоσiкns, Constantinople, 1859; Sathas, 'lσTopi-
κὸν δοκίμιον περὶ τοῦ Θεάτρου καὶ τῆς μουσικῆς τῶν Βυζαν.
Tívшv, Venice, 1878; Bouvy, Etude sur les origines du rhyme
tonique dans l'hymnographie de l'église grecque, Nîmes, 1886,
Hatherly, A Treatise on Byzantine Music, London, 1892, p. 152.
2 Haggai i. 14.
<pb n="295"/>
country of Adiabene. First of all he founded a large
and famous school in Képhar-Uzzêl,' a village of rich
and noble people. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="143"/> And the blessed Rabban
Bábhai tarried in this school for many years during
the lifetime of the honourable Zadhnaphrôkh," the
father of the noble Prókhzâdh,³ the father of the
gentle-natured Lûhrâsâph* and Maslěmah," and by his
encouragement, while the holy Mår John was Metro-
politan Bishop, he afterwards passed over to the country
of Marga. And he founded there twenty-four schools,
some of them being founded for the first time, and
others being decayed schools which he restored. And
since, perchance, there may be some who coming across
these lines will consider us to be boasters and liars,
I will mention these schools by their names, even though
our discourse should assume at this point an exceedingly
vain and foolish' character.
lay on the east side of فري
I. e., the 'village of the Gazelle', 'uzzel being stat. abs. of
'uzzaila. Kephar-'Uzzêl, i. e.,
the Upper or Great Zab. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 236, 296.
Zadhân-parrûh, 1. See Nöldeke,
Read
Geschichte der Perser, p. 356, note 1.
فرخ زاد ,Parrah-zadh فكوني Read :
* I. e.,
لهراسب
6, a rare word.
5 I. e., äálné.
a speaker of vain things, a
all ,ܩܒܐ ܒܕܘܠܐ ,ܒܪܐ ܗܕܝܐ ܨܒܓܘܠܐ ܨܒܕܘܝܐ ܠܫܢܬ = gamulous person
of which synonyms are explained by
"a man
who speaketh vain and foolish things." See Payne Smith,
Thes., col. 446.
7, emptiness, foolishness, insipidity.
<pb n="296"/>CHAPTER II.'
OF THE SCHOOLS WHICH RABBAN [BABHAI] FOUNDED, AND
THEIR NAMES.
When [this] blessed man had come to the country
of Marga, he first of all gathered together the scholars
and founded the Hudhrâ, and revised and corrected
the codices. [He next built a school] in Bashosh,* a
village of Saphsâphâ,³ and after this [another] in the
Monastery of Barșil (?) in the province of Gârin,❝ an-
other in the Monastery of Shâmirà,' another in the
Monastery of Ķôri, another in Eķra, another in Ḥardes,
another in Shalmath, another in Bêth-Edrè, another
in Hětârȧ, another in Makķabtâ, another in Şâwrà dhe
Niram dhe Ra'awatha,, another in Kôph," <pb type="textAllignment"  n="144"/> an-
other in Nêrabh Barzî," another in Gûbê, another
in the Monastery of Mar Ephraim, another in the
Monastery of Mar Aḥa, another in Maya Karîrê,"
2
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 178, col. 2.
Literally "he built the Hudhra," i. e., the service-book for
the Sundays of the whole year. See supra, pp. 153, 189.
3 Or "he corrected the sections," forεPIKOTŃ,
"section", "chapter".
* See supra, p. 217, note 1.
5 See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 223.
6 Compare
A
Syriac text p. 346, line 8.
7 Assemànî (B. O., iii. 1, p. 178, col. 2, 1. 18) omits this
name.
* See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 223.
9 I. ., "the neck of Niram of the shepherds."
10 A village near Akra. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 225.
The account of the fortifying of this place is given in Book
VI. chap. 12; see Syriac text p. 368ff.
See infra, Book iii. chap. 8.
<pb n="297"/>
another in Béth Âsâ,' another in Beth Sâţî,' another
in Beth Ķardagh, another in Ḥennes, ³ another in Beth
Râstak, another in Bêth Narķôs, and another in Bêth
Tarshěmâyê; these are the schools which this wise
gardener planted and restored in the country of Margâ.
Now some say that he had sixty disciples [who were]
teachers, and that he founded sixty schools, and ap-
pointed a master to each one of them, and that through
the zeal of believing and God-loving men, who made
the instruction [of children] in divine things their care,
he set apart for them property and funds for their
maintenance. And he came back to Kephar ‘Uzzêl, and
twice a year he visited all the schools, in order that
laxity of discipline might not enter [into them], and that
the musical training' and canons and orders of services
which he had made his disciples acquire might not be
destroyed; and thus this manner of singing was called
the "musical system of Rabban Bâbhai."
* Perhaps the same as . Cf. B.O., ii. p. 221, col. 2, 1. 33.
2 I. e.,
see Syriac text p. 329. line 17.
3 The modern Bavian, situated on the right bank of the
Gômel river, about twenty-five miles nearly north of Môşûl.
For an account of the Assyrian sculptures at this place see
Layard, Nineveh and Babylon, London, 1853, p. 208 ff.
4 See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 97, note 867.
5 Assemânî (B. O., iii. 1, p. 178, col. 2, 1. 28) has 25
6 formed with the Persian termination ↳ keeping,
guarding. The word is explained by gardener, p
keeper of a garden,—
7
in tune.
بستنباني .
2. c., the knowledge of singing in unison and
8 See Du Cange, Glossarium, col. 582; Badger, Nestorians,
vol. ii. p. 251 ff.
PP
<pb n="298"/>CHAPTER III.*
OF THE BOOKS WHICH THIS RABBAN BABHAI COMPOSED,*
AND OF THE END OF HIS LIFE.
Let no
man think that because [Rabban Bâbhai]
was exceedingly learned in the training and culture
of the voice he was ignorant of the knowledge which
is in books, or that because he was thoroughly instructed
in the Holy Scriptures he was remote from other
knowledge, for he has left us works on various subjects;
and he wrote many discourses and treatises on doctrine
into which if any man shall enter he will find that
he was much skilled <pb type="textAllignment"  n="145"/> and fertile in philo-
sophic reasoning." And he wrote twenty-two funeral
orations arranged alphabetically, which are recited by
boys on the festival of Palm Sunday;" and "Consola-
tions" and "Blessings", according to the letters [of the
alphabet]; and many "Epistles" to divers persons; and
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 179.
2 According to 'Abhd-sho' he wrote "Orations, Epistles,
Hymns of Praise, Histories, Admonitions and Homilies"
.181 .B. O., iII. I, p ܘܐܓܪ̈ܬܐ ܘܬܫܒܚܬܐ ܘܬܫܥܝܬܐ ܘܡܪ̈ܬܝܢܘܬܐ ܘܡܪ̈ܕܘܬܐ
3 Better
42362)
-
Bewpía spiritual vision, intellectual and divine
جنه في العلم ويقال البصر العقلي . .sight or understanding. Cf
,2441 .Orient ومعرفة النظر العقلي والتميّا بالعقل والتميا الصحيح
Slygus le popp
fol. 384a, col. 2. So also Rich 7203, fol. 1926, col. 1.
50A, literally "interpretations". See Badger, Nestorians,
vol. ii. p. 19,
bon-Orient. 2441,
fol. 389a, col. I, and Rich 7203, fol. 1986, col. 2.
6 215461 — NË MIX Cf. Payne Smith, Thes., col. 1639.
<pb n="299"/>
lengthy "Blessings' upon brides and bridegrooms." And
because he was accustomed to go to the Commemora-
tion of the holy Mâr Jacob of Bêth ˆÂbhê, he composed
on that person twenty-two hymns in the "great mystery","
in the order of the letters [of the alphabet]. And he
wrote the composition, “Behold, my days have flown,
behold, to the dead", consisting of twelve different parts,³
and the hymn on Mår Nestorius [beginning], “In the
path of the just"; and the other works on sundry and
divers matters written by that blessed teacher which,
if any man wisheth, he may find in our holy monastery
of Beth Abhê. And after all these his excellent deeds,
his planting and watering, and begetting, and rearing,
and making to bud, and to wax strong and to grow
old, he left this country and went to his own city, and
was there crowned with all the excellent virtues of a divine
life which pleased his Master, and at a great old age he
rested from his labours and troubles, and slept in the
dust of his fathers. And his venerable and holy body
was laid in the church in which he had learned and
taught, and a glorious recompense is laid up for
* Cf. the Blessings in the Marriage service quoted by Badger,
Nestorians, vol. ii. p. 254ff.
2 Assemání renders, "De eodem sancto Jacobo cantiones
magnis mysteriis refertas."
3 Assemânî renders, "Ecce avolarunt dies mei. Et ad hym-
num, qui incipit, Ecce mortuis, cantiones duodecim." See
Bickell, Carmina Nisibena, Leipzig, 1866, De re metrica,
pp. 31-35.
* For a list of the hymns of Bâbhai extant, see Wright,
Syr. Lit., p. 844, col. 1. The following hymn for the night of
Sunday in Epiphany week edited from Add. 14,675, fol. 171'a,
and Rich 7156, fol. 163, will serve as a specimen of the metri
cal compositions of this eminent writer.
<pb n="300"/>him in the day of the revelation of our Lord,
together with Kiörá (Cyrus), ' _and _Narsai, ' and
ܫܘܒܚܐ ܠܪ̈ܚܡܐ ܕܫܠܚܘܟ ܨܐܕܝ܆ ܡܝܚܐ ܫܡܐ ܕܙܕܝܩܘܬܐ ܨܡܚܐ ܕܨܡ ܡܢ ܒܝܬ
ܕܘܝܕ: ܘܩܪܐ ܠܥܡܡܐ ܠܬܝܒܘܬܐ، ܩܪܘܒܘ ܬܝܒܐ ܘܫܐܠܘ ܪ̈ܚܡܐ܆ ܥܕ ܐܝܬ ܐܬܪܐ ܠܬܝܒܘܬܐ.
ܘܢܫܒܘܩ ܟܠܩ ܡܐ ܕܒܠܗ܆ ܘܢܫܐܠ ܪܚܡܐ ܒܓܠܝܘܬ ܐܪ̈ܐ، ܫܡܥ ܒܥܘܬܢ ܘܗܒ ܬܠܬܢ:
ܡܬܒܦܝܢܢ܆ ܠܟ ܕܝܢܐ ܣܓܝ ܪ̈ܚܡܐ. ܝܣܐ ܚܘܒܝܢ ܘܥܛܝ ܚܛܗܝܢ܆ ܛܒܐ ܕܛܥܝܢ ܝܘܩܪܗ ܕܥܘܠܢ.
$
ܨܒܝܢܟ. ܘܥܡ ܩܕܝܫܐ ܘܟܐܢܐ ܕܐܚܒܘܟ*: ܢܙܡܪ ܫܘܒܚܐ ܠܐܠܗܘܬܟ ܘܟܠܢ ܐܟܚܕ ܪܤܩ
I. e., Cyrus of al-Hirah, surnamed the Doctor, a disciple
of Mår Abha; he flourished about A. D. 550. According to
'Abhd-isho he wrote "Expositions and Funeral Orations,"
Baños. See B. O., ii. p. 412, col. 1; iii. 1, p. 170, chap. XCV.
I., Narsai, called the "Harp of the Spirit"
ie
by 'Abhd-Isho', and surnamed x, the "Leper." Narsai sprang
from Ma'allthȧ; he laboured in the school of Nisibis for
fifty years, where he was a companion of Bar-Saumâ, and
at Edessa for twenty years; he fled from this latter town
to escape the wrath of Cyrus the Bishop (A. D. 471-498), and
died at Nisibis early in the next century. He was famous as a
writer of hymns and other metrical compositions, his favourite
metre being that of six syllables. According to 'Abhd-Îsho' he
wrote commentaries on Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers,
Joshua, Judges, Ecclesiastes, Isaiah, the twelve Minor Prophets,
Add. 14.675 saxamby.
**Add. 14,675 omits this clause.
<pb n="301"/>
John, and Abraham by whose doctrine he was him-
self enlightened, and enlightened [others], and from the
manner of whose lives he was inflamed with the desire³
to emulate them in the holy life.
Now they say concerning him that when he was
a teacher in Képhar 'Uzzėl the mother of Mår Abraham*
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, twelve volumes of metrical discourses
(360 in number), a liturgy, expositions of the Eucharist and of
Baptism, consolatory epistles and funeral orations, hymns and
sermons and exhortations, and a book entitled On the Corrup
tion of Morals, pas. See B. O., iii. 1, p. 65f.;
Wright, Syr. Lit., p. 830; and Bar-Hebraeus, Chron. Eccles., ii.
col. 77-
I. e., John, surnamed Adhramah, bpi (see Bk. 1. chap. 14.
supra, p. 67), formerly a monk in the Monastery of Mount Izlá
when Mâr Bâbhai was the abbot. He left that monastery with
Zekha-Isho and Abraham and went with them to Dåsen, and
built a monastery; he is usually described as "John of Beth
Rabban." According to 'Abhd-isho he wrote commentaries upon
Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Job, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Pro-
verbs; controversial treatises against the Magians, Jew's and
heretics; discourses, prayers, a Discourse upon the death of
Khusrau, a Discourse upon the plague at Nisibis, Consolations,
Questions upon the Old and New Testaments, hymns of various
kinds, and a work upon the "tones of hymns",
B. O., . 1, pp. 72, 631, 708.
See
I. e., Abraham of Mount Izlá, the friend of John Adhramah,
(see supra, p. 37, note 1). He wrote commentaries upon Joshua,
Judges, the Books of Kings, Ecclesiasticus, Isaiah, the twelve
Minor Prophets, Daniel, and the Song of Songs; he wrote also
upon the 'Cause of the Sessions' as, and composed hymns.
See B. O., ii. 1, p. 71.
3, the desire to rival some one.
I. e., Abraham bar-Dâshandâd who flourished about A. D.
720, and who was the teacher of the Catholicus Timothy I.,
and of his successor Îsho' bar-Non, and of Abû Nuh al-Anbari in
<pb n="302"/>the Lame of Beth Şayyadhê, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="146"/> carried and
brought her son to him, and weeping before him, said,
"Master, pray for this half of a man' to whom I have
given birth." And when he had examined and felt
him he answered and said, "This is no half of a man,
and he shall become a father of fathers and a chief of
teachers, and his name and his doctrine shall be pro-
claimed in all the East;" and this actually happened as
is manifest to every man. And in the time of his old
age, when he had gone to his own city, he asked the
numerous disciples that were before him a question
unknown to us, and to which none of them were able
to give him an answer.³ And he began to weep and
to beat his face, and to pluck out the hair of his head
and to cry out and say, "O woe is me, the blinded
of sin, for while thinking that I should leave behind
me in the Church wise and understanding heirs, it hath
befallen me, the wretched and stupid man, to be like
unto a man who hath sown but hath not reaped, and
who hath not been made glad in his labour." Now there
was there before the holy man, a much enlightened
the school of Bashosh in Saphsâphâ. According to 'Abhd-Ìsho
he wrote a book of admonition, a commentary on the discourse
of Mark the monk (see Wright, Cat. Syr. MSS., p. 482, col. 1),
a disputation with the Jews, the Book of the king's way, dis-
courses on repentance, and letters upon various subjects. See
B. O., . 1, p. 194; and Wright, Syr. Lit., p. 844. For the
writings of Isho' bar-Nôn and Abû Nûḥ al-Anbarî see B. O., iii. I,
pp. 165, 212.
* A village in the country of Arbêl or Arbela. See B. O., ii.
p. 251, col. 2, l. 12; iii. 1, pp. 179, 343; Bar-Hebraeus, Chron.
Eccles., ii. col. 437.
2. See Payne Smith. Thes., col. 2140.
3 Literally, solution.
<pb n="303"/>
young man whose name was Gûryâ, and because the
Divine grace is accustomed to set apart aforetime those
who belong to it, and to set apart those who seek'
after spiritual wisdom, this young man was stirred up
by grace and said to Rabban, "Peradventure the question
which thou hast asked, Master, is thus." And the old
man being stirred up with joy, answered and said,
"Who is this then?" and they said to him "Gûryâ”.
And he commanded that he should be brought near
to him, and he laid his hands and his mouth upon the
young man's head, and answered joyfully and said,
"Pray for this Gûrya, for he shall become a mighty
hound;" and this actually came to pass to this young
man according to the word of the blessed old man.
For after the death of Rabban, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="147"/> Gûryȧ became
a teacher after him, and he emulated his master in
his teaching and manner of life, and behold both of
them are laid in that holy church; may their memories
be for blessing, and may we be aided by their prayers.
Amen.
Here endeth the History of Rabban Bábhai the
teacher.
لغنية Read :
2
— 2 Kings iii. 10.
3 There is a play here upon the name Guryâ which
means both a “lion's whelp", and a "puppy".
* In Bk. IV. chap. 16 (Syriac text p. 217, 1. 11) he is
called, "the much enlightened and famous teacher, the disciple
of the master of masters, Rabban Bâbhai, the teacher and founder
of schools".
<pb n="304"/>THE HISTORY OF THE HOLY MAR MARAN-AMMEH THE
METROPOLITAN BISHOP [OF SALAKH].
CHAPTER I.
THE APOLOGY.
The triumphs of holy men are the boast of the
Holy Church, and the beloved rehearsings of them are
a lifting up of the head to her children. Abundant
helps for us descend from them, and they confirm in us
the love of their Lord. The glorious festivals which
we make to them, with whom we expect to receive
participation in the kingdom above, and their yearly
commemorations, proclaim the praise of that power Who
aided them here, Who led them far into His mysteries,
and Who entrusted to them the pasturing of His flocks,
and with Whom they are there [in heaven] enjoying
happiness in the glory which He prepared for them.
And, moreover, to those men who here [upon earth] be-
came an altar of prayer, which continually breathed forth
the incense of Life, who rejoiced all who were round
about them, and who were angels clothed with bodies
here [upon earth] it belongeth to speak to God. "And
as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and
settest me before thy face for ever." And because I,
the wretched sinner, have in my lack of wisdom³ made
ready to rehearse the triumphs and histories of one
of these holy men, I entreat their prayers that I may
be near to be helped by them, and that our Lord may
grant that I may speak according to the
Psalm xli. 12.
power of
2 See supra, p. 295, note 7.
my
<pb n="305"/>
poverty, although it be not that which befitteth the
occasion. And moreover He willeth that, according to
his power, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="148"/> each one of us should cast his offering
before Him, like the two mites of the widow.³ And by the
prayers of the friend of His love, the chosen and holy
man concerning whom my discourse dareth to recount
the history, may my drawing near to the rehearsal of
matters concerning him be a propitiation and not a
condemnation for me.
CHAPTER II.
OF THE ORIGIN OF MAR MÂRAN-AMMEH, AND OF HOW,
AND BY WHOM, HE WAS DIRECTED IN INSTRUCTION IN
DIVINE THINGS.
Now the blessed Mâr Mâran-ammeh sprang from
a family in the country of Ṭirhân,* and his city, which
is now in ruins, was called Ḥețârâ;³ here he was born
and brought up by believing parents. And he was
named by them 'Mâran-ammeh',' a name which was
full of prayer and supplication for him that Christ our
I. e., "my poor power."
2. For the weight and value of these pieces of money
see under Payne Smith, Thes., col. 2164.
3 St. Mark xii. 42.
* Read always . . . See Hoffmann, Auszüge,
p. 191, note 1508; Lagarde, Armenische Studien, Nr. 2245,
p. 152; B. O., iii. II. p. 931.
5 Read i. e., pall, Ton, "Arpal See Hoffmann,
Auszüge, p. 184, note 1440. Hatra of Ṭirhân must be distin-
guished from Ḥatrâ of Mârgâ, Ḥatrà in Athôr, etc.
61. e., "our Lord [is] with him."
99
<pb n="306"/>Lord might be with him and might dwell in him. Now
in his youth he learned doctrine in the church of his
native city. And because at that time Rabban Bâbhai
excelled above all others in teaching in the city of
Gěbhîltâ, Mâran-ammeh left his parents and their posses-
sions and departed to that teacher. And he was trained
and directed in all the knowledge of divine things be-
fore him, and he became learned and wise. And when
the blessed Rabban Bâbhai went up to this country,
the blessed Maran-'ammeh was the one man out of all
his sixty famous disciples and teachers who went up
with him; and when he had built schools in the village of
Képhar Uzzel, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="149"/> he established Maran-ammeh as the
teacher of this village. And the fame of his glorious
acts went forth in all this country, because his learning
shone with the purity of his manner of life, and he
made his body to abstain from every kind of delicate
food; now he used to feed himself on bread and a few
onions, just sufficient to maintain life. And he lived
in this manner from his youth up so that he might
not become an object of reproach in his old age, for
he had learned that "he who liveth delicately in his
youth shall be a servant, and in his latter end shall
groan." When he was a young man the monks his
contemporaries held his manner of life to be marvellous,
because that in addition to that great labour of the
weight of the toil of teaching which was laid upon
him, he was able to embrace the laborious life of
voluntary abstinence coupled with great strictness of
life. And he was a teacher for many years, while the
Proverbs xxix. 21.
and the Greek "Ος κατασπαταλᾷ ἐκ παιδός, οἰκέτης
מְפַנֵּק מִנַּעַר עַבְדּוֹ וְאַחֲרִיתוֹ The Hebrew is
pay
ἔσται, ἔσχατον δὲ ὀδυνηθήσεται ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτῷ.
<pb n="307"/>
blessed Mår Aḥa was Metropolitan, and the ship of
his soul travelled on in a divine and noble manner
by reason of the abundance of the beautiful things which
were therein.
CHAPTER III.
OF THE EPISCOPATE OF THE COUNTRY OF SALAKH WHICH
THE BLESSED MAR MARAN-AMMEH RECEIVED, AND OF THE
MIRACLES WHICH TOOK PLACE THERE BY HIS HANDS.
Now there was in the country of Salâkh a holy
and venerable Bishop called Mâr Isho-zěkhâ,' the hist-
ory concerning whom I have already written, by whose
hands mighty deeds and miracles were wrought in that
country, and when he departed this life of troubles
and trials for the rest of those who sleep in Christ,—
inasmuch as that country abounded in Magianism,2 <pb type="textAllignment"  n="150"/>
and not only in the worship of the sun, moon and
stars, but [the people] in their stupidity offered worship
also to trees of beautiful foliage, and this worship of
trees existed even in the days of the old man from
whom I learned [this]. -the blessed Metropolitan Mâr
Aḥâ³ was obliged to appoint and send the holy Mâran-
'ammeh to that place, for he was a teacher and a
See Book ii. chap. 32, supra, p. 239.
22, "a heresy composed of paganism and Chaldeeism.
It adoreth the powers of nature, (lit. elements) like the heathen,
worshippeth the stars, and erreth in the computation and know-
ledge of the planets and Signs of the Zodiac, and in the ruling
of the stars, like the Chaldeans". See Payne Smith, Thes,
col. 2009.
See supra, p. 249ff.
<pb n="308"/>righteous man, that by his knowledge and manner of
life he might root up the tares from that country. Thus
he was appointed, and he set out for that country,
having received from the Holy Spirit with [his] conse-
cration [the power] to work mighty deeds and to show
forth miracles, while the Divine love which was in his
soul, and the great purity of life which he had cultiv-
ated from his youth, exalted him in the chief-priest-
hood and in spiritual workings. Now when he had
gone forth to visit [his] districts, he came to a village
called Bêth Newâ,' and there was in it a man who
had brought into [his house] another wife besides his
lawful wife. And he called for him to come before
him, but he came not, and he required of him to expel
the whore from his house, but he did it not. And
Mâr Mâran-ammeh cursed him, saying, "I trust in our
Lord that the Divine wrath may come upon thee, and
that both thy wives may be widows;" and it came to
pass on the morrow that the man lifted up a large
butcher's knife to cut meat, and by the agency of God
he smote his left hand, and it fell from him, and all
his blood ran out from him and he died, according to
the word of the holy man to him; and fear fell upon
all those who heard [of it].
And from this village he set out for another called
* A village in the diocese of Salakh, which must be sought
for in the territory occupied by the Bâlik Kurds near Rawandiz;
it was one of the seats of the Shahrîghan sect. See Hoffmann,
Auszüge, p. 245.
2, Arab. btw, plur. blew, "a cook's large knife
with a long, thin blade". Compare blw "butcher",
couper en longues lignes, Dozy, Supplément, i. p. 652.
<pb n="309"/>
Beth Wark, which is in the province of Ḥithr, and in
it there was a widow who had a little only son; and
it fell out that he died as the blessed man entered the
village, and many people were gathered together, and
were weeping. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="151"/> And when he learned con-
cerning the lonely condition of that old woman, he was
exceedingly sorry, and he commanded that they should
bring the body to the church; and he put every one
outside, and began to entreat God for the life of the
boy. And God, to Whose power all things are easy,
Who by the hands of Elijah' and Elisha³ brought
the dead back to life, granted to the blessed man his
petition for the resuscitation of the boy, and he came
to life, and Mâran-ammeh gave him to his mother;
and all the people were stirred up to gladness and to
praise.
And there were in the country certain Shahrighân,*
who although they were nominally Christians, made
* A village in the diocese of Salâkh, and a seat of the
Shahrighân sect. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 245.
32 Kings iv. 35.
21 Kings xvii. 22.
4 The ✗be, or were the landed proprietors of the
country, and took a higher rank than the Dihkânê (see supra,
p. 256). According to Nöldeke (quoted by Hoffmann, Auszüge,
The explanation of the word. رئيس الكورة - سهريج (239.
given in Orient. 2441, fol. 3676, col. I, agrees with that quoted
by Hoffmann from the Socin MS. of Bar-Bahlûl; but Rich 7203,
fol. 1766, col. 2, gives ✓50x-pl. See also
Theophylact Simocatta, ed. Bonn v. 9; Nöldeke, Geschichte der
Perser, p. 446f; and Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 236-239. The
Shahrighân, 2, 4, are said to have formed a noble class
which ranked next to the three great castes of Sawâd. See
Mas'udi, Murug al-Dhahab (Les Prairies d'Or), ed. Barbier de
Meynard, tom. ii. p. 240, Paris 1863.
<pb n="310"/>confession that Christ was an ordinary man, and said
that "He was as one of the Prophets," and the Bishops
who lived in the country laboured among them, but
they did not accept the true and orthodox doctrine."
Now when Maran-ammeh had learned concerning them,
he went to them on a Sabbath day, that he might keep the
first day of the week with them, and pray for them; and he
lifted them up with him in the service, while he prayed
in his heart to our Lord on their behalf, that He
would make His light to shine into their hearts. Now
when all the people of the village were in that church,
and they had begun [to say], "Light hath dawned for
the righteous, and joy for the upright of heart," the
church and its court were filled with light which sur-
passed the light of the sun, and all men wondered and
were amazed. And the holy man answered and said
to them, "Now that Christ our Lord hath shewed you
His light, and hath kindled His truth in your hearts,
confess ye with us that He is the Lord and God,³ Jesus
Christ; or do ye, peradventure, need to see other
things [before ye will believe]?" They answered and
said to him, "We believe, O our father, we believe that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and that He is God;"
and at the time of the Holy Mysteries he absolved
them, and they became beloved sons of the Church
their mother, through the wonderful thing which
Christ had wrought before them by the hand of His
saint Mâran-ammeh. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="152"/> And one of the con-
* This sentence is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 482, col. 2.
2 Psalm xcvii. II.
3 Compare : sox Book ii. chap. 34, supra, p. 249, note 2.
* This sentence is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 483, col. 1.
<pb n="311"/>
gregation had a mule' for riding upon, which had never
been subservient to him, and this was very grievous
to her owner, for she was a fine and beautiful animal;
and he spake concerning her to the blessed man who
commanded him to bring her to the church together
with her bridle. And the holy man took the bridle,
and signed it with the sign of the Cross, and he spake
to the mule as to a rational being, and said, “For the
sake of our Lord open thy mouth, and take the bit;"
and she opened her mouth and took it in all quietness;
and every man was moved to the praise of God.
Now there was in the church of our native village
Neḥshôn³, a large ant's nest built in the wall, and it
was not easy for the believers to root it out, because
it occupied the whole wall up to the roof; and, because
that church was roofed over and made strong with
painted boards and beams, this thing was very grievous
unto them, and when the holy man came to them they
spake to him concerning this matter. And he washed
the cross which he wore upon him in water, and he
told them to sprinkle the water on the nest, and on
the morrow not a single [ant] was to be found.
Now in those days the Shahrighân' used to take
from the Dahķânės one half of the corn, and wine,
and nuts, and poll-tax, and their oppression was very
بغلة
* Vat. has spas Aso: Das, where D is the Latin mula,
Arab. plur. 1 and 2, and (Dozy, Supplé-
ment, ii. p. 517, col. 2), i. c., Pers. p.
3 A seat of the Shahrîghân in the diocese of Salâkh. See
Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 245, and B. O., i. p. 194.
* See supra, p. 309, note 4.
See supra, p. 256, note 2.
<pb n="312"/>severe, and their exactions were unlimited, and the
Dahkânê made complaints to their pious Bishop con-
cerning their taxes and their tribute. And he answered,
and said to them, "My children, the time is at hand
when all these villages and towns will be taken by the
Arabs, and all these Shahrighân shall go up out of the
country, and a man whose name is Ḥitm bar-Ṣâlâḥ*
shall persecute them and root them up, and ye all
shall be subservient to him, because, as it is said, "the
iniquitous man shall take vengeance on the iniquitous
man, and the Lord upon them both." <pb type="textAllignment"  n="153"/> And
this actually came to pass to that country after many
years. Now it appears that at that time Hitm bar-Şâlâḥ
was not yet born, but because the spirit of the prophets
is submissive to the prophets, Mâran-ammeh, by the
eye of the Spirit, made known aforetime what was
about to happen.
CHAPTER IV.
WHICH SHOWETH HOW THE HOLY MÂR MARAN-AMMEH WAS
APPOINTED METROPOLITAN BISHOP OF ADIABENE, ³ AND
[DESCRIBETH] THE FIRST MIRACLE WHICH HE
WROUGHT IN THAT COUNTRY.
Now the blessed and truly venerable and holy
Metropolitan Mâr Ahâ, being crowned with a diadem
I
literally deep..
(صالح) bar Salih (حاتم) Hatim .
3 In the list of chapters at the beginning of the work Mâran-
‘ammeh is said to have been appointed Metropolitan of Arbela.
<pb n="313"/>
of light, ended his life in the country of Margâ, and
his chaste body was laid in the village of Shalmath;
and the choice of the whole country, but particularly
of Loharsaph (Lohrâsp)' and Maslĕmah,' and of the
rest of their brethren, fell upon the holy Bishop Mar
Maran-ammeh, and he was appointed [Bishop of Arbela]
by the blessed Catholicus and Patriarch Mâr Jacob.³
And when he had come and had been received with
much pomp and with the honour which befitted his
holiness, he went up and sat on the throne of the
fathers. Now certain insolent and thievish Arabs who
were in that country had seized upon a mill called
Bêth Warda, which formed part of the possessions of
the house of the Patriarch, and because the holy Mar
Aḥâ died some way off, those Arabs rose up quickly,
and with little resistance' called it their own property.
And when the holy Máran-ammeh had been appointed,
he and all the honourable nobles with him worked with
every possible means to take it back from those wrongful
possessors, but were unable to do so; and when he
said, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="154"/> "The mill belongs to the house of the
Metropolitan, and is [therefore] my right," they dis-
I, C.,
Apoodono, see Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 150.
Lohrâsp stands for the old Arwatâspa (see Nöldeke, Geschichte
der Perser, p. 2, note 1), but the Arabic form of the name is
Bohrâsp (See Mas'udi, Les Praires d'Or, tom ii. p. 121
2 I. c., asins.
3 He sat from 753-772. See Bar-Hebraeus, Chron. Eccles.,
ii. coll. 156-158.
* I. e., on the patriarchal throne in Arbela.
5. e., "the place of roses".
625=550,
strife, dispute.
2000, contention, resistance,
rr
<pb n="314"/>puted the matter with him, saying that they would not
give it up at all. Then Mâr Måran-ammeh answered and
said to them, "Since ye thus dispute the matter, and
I will not put yourselves away from this iniquity, come,
let us go to the mill, that we may learn from it to
whom it belongs." And those Arabs, although they
made a mock at the difficulty of these words, and neither
trusted nor believed in the power which was united
to the blessed man, agreed to this condition, and went
forth with him; and with them there were many Shah-
righân' and Dahķânė [who went] to see what would
come of his ordering. And [when] they had gone
into [the mill], Mår Mâran-ammeh answered and said
to his opponents, "Since the mill is yours, command it
to shew us that it is yours, and then we will leave it
in your hands and go away." And they answered and
said to him, "Thou must order it to shew us to whom
it belongs". He said to them, "If I command it, and it
doeth what I have commanded, will ye leave it, and
take yourselves away?" And they said to him, "If we
see this stone obedient to thy command, then we have
no portion in it, and we will depart immediately, and
the mill shall be thine." Then Mâr Maran-ammeh
having knelt down and prayed to God, turned towards
the mill, and said, "O stone without feeling, by the
great and Divine power of the word of the Lord which
is mighty in the height and in the depth, if thou
belongest to these Arabs, then according to thy custom,
grind flour; but if, on the other hand, thou art not
the property of these men, but art the inheritance of
the Metropolitan of this country, let what thou grindest
* See supra, p. 309.
See supra, p. 256.
<pb n="315"/>
be changed to ashes." And when he had said this,
ashes began to come forth from under the mill, and the
flour disappeared; and every man was made afraid and
brought to the confession of God. And Mâr Mâran-
'ammeh answered and said to those Arabs, "Now
although [it hath happened] thus, if the mill be yours,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="155"/> command it to change the ashes into flour;" but they
marvelled and were put to shame, and they emptied
their hands of the mill in great disgrace. And Mår
Mâran‍ammeh having given permission the mill changed
its grinding of ashes into its usual grinding of flour, and
this report flew throughout all countries. Praise be to
that merciful God Who worketh for His Church at all
times, and among all peoples, and Who hath never
left, nor will leave, Himself without a witness,' but
Who establisheth in His churches the chosen doers of
mighty deeds, and maketh them fathers from being
His sons, and Who restoreth by their hands the miracles,
and wonderful acts and mighty deeds of the Apostles
their fathers!
CHAPTER V.3
OF THOSE PROVINCES WHICH MÂR MÂRAN-AMMEH TOOK
OVER TO THE JURISDICTION OF THE THRONE OF ADIABENE
FROM THE [OTHER] THRONES OF THE DIOCESE, AND OF
THOSE WHICH HE GAVE IN THEIR STEAD.
Now from the country of Salâkh he took the pro-
.ܠܛܚܘܢܳܗ Read ܃
2 Acts xiv. 17.
This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 483. col. 1.
<pb n="316"/>vince of Dêbhûr,' and he wrote an order' and placed
it in his episcopal house³ to the end that from now
and henceforth the Bishop of Salåkh should have no
power over it, and also that his name should not be
proclaimed in any one of the churches thereof. From
Âdhôrbâîghân he took Inner Salâkh, and gave it to
the Bishop of Salâkh in the place of the province of
Dêbhûr. To Stephen, Bishop of Dåsen, he gave the
Great Monastery, and all the province of Naḥlâ and
Talânâ, which belonged to the diocese of Marga;
and he wrote for him an order that any Metropolitan
who should succeed him should have no power to dis-
pute [the matter] or to take it away from the throne
of the country of Dåsen. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="156"/> From the pious and
holy Mâr Shlêmôn (Solomon), Bishop of Ḥadhattâ, he
* Assemânî has jas. Hoffmann transcribes Dêbhwâr (Aus-
züge, p. 244 and note 1936). This place is mentioned with
Dâsen in De Goeje, Bibl.. Geogr. Arab., pars vi. p. 245,
والسلق Hoffmann would read سا For .13 1.
الصك
2 254
a
written document, an order, and äöjj,
an agreement, treaty. Bar-Bahlûl says that the difference be-
tween and (covenant) is this: 251 is that which a
man takes upon himself by the submission of love (po
), but is is that which he is bound to do under a pen-
alty. See Duval, Lexicon, col. 307. Brit. Mus. MS. Rich 7203,
fol. 12a, col. 2, explains the word by
Τα πατὸ ἐπισκοπεῖον.
us.
From this it is clear that Salâkh Gawâithà lay on the
border of Adhôrbâîghân, and it is probable that it is the same
place as Salak al-Audi. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 245.
See Bk. ii. chap. 34, supra, p. 250, note 2.
6 außería. See Payne Smith, Thes., col. 103;
and Duval, Lexicon, col. 97.
<pb n="317"/>
took the Monastery of Bårķa,' and he gave him two
districts from the dominion of Adiabene, Gamlâwlôḥê
and Merdê; and because of the holiness and the ex-
cellence of the manner of life of Mâr Mâran-ammeh,
no man disputed or murmured against these [arrange-
ments], but everything which he commanded and did
was received with gladness as from an angel of the
Lord, and behold the divisions which he made stand
to this day.
CHAPTER VI.
OF THE REVELATION WHICH MAR MÂRAN-AMMEH RECEIVED
IN A VISION OF THE ANGEL OF THE LORD, TO DESTROY
WITH HIS HANDS THE SEED THAT WORKED EVIL AND THE
CORRUPT CHILDREN WHO WERE IN THE COUNTRY OF MARGA.
Among the sins which are committed by man there
is none more abominable and filthy than that of the
lust of the body, for it draweth him that indulgeth
in it into all error, and driveth him out in disgrace
from every thing which is seemly; and the lawful grati-
fication³ of the desire of the body which is full of
shamefacedness and modesty testifieth to this, for it
is performed in the night season and in the darkness.
* This monastery was situated on the Tigris, probably near
some sulphur spring. Mår Mâran-'ammeh went thither to drink
the waters of the Tigris; see Bk. iii. chap. X.
2
מַלְאַךְ הָאֱלֹהִים ;9 .Samuel xxix 1 כְּמַלְאַךְ אֱלֹהִים Compare
2 Samuel xiv. 17; we arredov Beoû Galatians iv. 14.
Literally, "the legal performance." Read.
Read .
.ܡܣܪܥܪܐ Read 5
<pb n="318"/>And thus the working of impurity cast to destruction
the whole generation that lived in the days of Noah*;
it burned the Sodomites with fire; it threw Judah into
disgrace; it drove Samson forth from the Divine care
which accompanied him; and it laid a blemish upon
David.³ And from this [thing] the blessed and divine
Paul hath commanded us to keep at a distance, saying,
"Flee fornication"," and "Whosoever destroyeth the <pb type="textAllignment"  n="157"/>
temple of God, him will God destroy, for the temple
of God is holy, which [temple] ye are." Now certain
men who were members of religious houses in various
places in the country of Marga, through this gratifi-
cation of corrupt and destructive lust, and by toiling in
other habits of life which provoke our Lord, put them-
selves away from what is seemly through the counsel
of the Evil One, and others who were not deserving of
the penalty of evil were made participators with them,
* Genesis vi. 12. The state of society before the Flood is
thus described in the Cave of Treasures.
...
.See Bezold, Die Schats/aölhle, p. 6of ܘܒܚܟ̈ܬܗܘܢ܁
2 Genesis xix. 24. 25.
4 Judges xiv. 1.
6 I Corinthians vi. 18.
3 Genesis xxxviii. 18.
5 2 Samuel xi. 2.
7 1 Corinthians iii. 17.
8 We must follow the reading of A.
<pb n="319"/>
just as in the case of the famines which took place in
the days of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, ³ those holy
men also were participators with the wicked men on
whose account the famines arose. What then? Now it
I came to pass one night that when the holy man was
engaged in prayer in the cell in which he lived, that
the Angel of the Lord appeared to him face to face,
in a glorious and exceedingly sublime vision, and the
temple of the blessed man was filled with a beautiful
odour. And he was greatly moved, and answered and
said to the spiritual being, "Who art thou, Master?"
And the angel answered and said to him, "I am the
Angel of the Lord who ministereth to this apostolic
throne of Arbêl." And the holy man answered and
said to him, "What doth my lord command his servant
[to do]?" And the angel answered and said to him,
"A command hath gone forth from before the Lord to
waste and destroy by thy hands a sinful people and
a people mighty in iniquity, which is in the country of
Margå, for their iniquity, like that of the people of
Sodom, hath gone up before the Lord, and like them
they shall receive punishment in divers ways according
to thy command." The blessed man answered and
said, "The Lord God is able to destroy them in a
moment as He destroyed the hosts of the Assyrians,³
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="158"/> how then can my feeble intervention be required
by Him by Whose nod the worlds stand, to whom if
He appeareth they shriek violently, and at the sight of
Whom the mountains reel, 6 and the earth trem-
Genesis xii. 10.
3 Genesis xliii. 1.
52 Kings xix. 35.
2 Genesis xxvi. I.
* Genesis xviii. 21.
6 Psalm xviii. 7; Psalm xcvii. 5; Isaiah v. 25.
<pb n="320"/>bleth?" The spiritual being said to him, "I am the
angel who hath accompanied thee in all thy adminis-
tration, and all those who have been before thee, and
I shall accompany all those who shall come after thee
until the end, and until time shall cease and be annihil-
ated; I will be a participator with thee in their des-
truction." The blessed man answered and said to him,
"It is neither just nor seemly that I should be the
executioner of my own children, and the slayer of
those who have been sanctified by me with baptism
and the laying on of hands, and whom I have made
to drink of the living water of the doctine of Christ;
spare me, a sinful man from doing this. The destruc-
tion of the Assyrians, ³ and the destruction of the people
of Israel which took place in the days of David, the
many cities which were overthrown, and the great
and mighty deeds which God hath worked from gener-
ation to generation, were not wrought by the hands
of men but by angels; go thou thyself then and do
that which thou̟ commandest me to do." The angel
said to him, "Dispute not with the Divine command,
lest thou appear pertinacious and obstinate; if ven-
geance is not taken upon them by means of thee, it will
Psalm civ. 32; Isaiah xxiv. 20.
2 quaestionarius i. e., carnifex, qui reos cruciat,
examinat, Baσávwv únηpérηs. Du Cange, Glossarium, Script.
Med. Inf. Latinitatis, col., 1025.
32 Kings xix. 35.
* 2 Samuel xxiv. 15; 1 Chronicles xxi. 14.
5 Genesis xix. 25.
ܒܗܠܥܝܐ ܒܨ. ܗ. ܡܟܡܢܐ ܗ̇ܘ ܕܒܩܠ ܡܨܘܬܗ ܟܢܫ Compare .ܒܗܠܐ 6
Poway
sw #xas.
Mus. MS. Orient. 2441, fol. 3256, col. 2.
Brit.
<pb n="321"/>
not be known that they have justly been destroyed
and have perished, and also they will [not] be a warn-
ing to others not to be like unto them;" and when
the angel had spoken these things with him, he dis-
appeared from him, and Mâr Måran-ammeh saw him
no more.
CHAPTER VII.
OF HOW THE BLESSED MAN LEFT HIS EPISCOPAL HOUSE
AND FLED, AND OF THE ANGELIC AGENCY WHICH
PREVENTED HIS FLIGHT.
Now when it appeared to the holy man thus, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="159"/>
and he knew that the word had gone forth from be-
fore the Lord, with tears and great grief he secretly
left his cell, and went out by night to go forth into
solitude remote from all mankind, that he might not
be the means by which the matter which the angel
required of him [should be accomplished]; and he turned
the impetuosity of his course with very rapid steps to
a mountain eastwards, having his eyes filled with tears,
and prayer and supplication in his mouth. But just as
the Lord turned back the fugitive prophet in the belly
of the whale unto the preaching of Nineveh, ³ and com-
pleted by him that which was required of him, so also
.a are word ,ܒܠܚܘܕܝܣܬ݂ܐ -
-кHTOG. This word is explained by Kow "fish",
"great fish", a "dragon," in "crocodile." Brit. Mus.
MSS. Rich 7203, fol. 148 a, col. 2; and Orient. 2441, fol. 321a,
col. 2. See also Ahrens, Buch der Naturgegenstande, (text) p. 55.
3 Jonah ii. 10.
<pb n="322"/>did He turn back this fugitive priest, not by means of
a fish, but by means of the element' of fire did He
make him afraid; and he returned to His service. Now
when he had gone on the whole day, without food
and without water, he came to a valley in which was
a pool³ of water, and there were reeds* round about
it, and he went into the place where the reeds were
dense that he might satisfy his hunger with the plants
and herbs which were round about him. Then that
guardian angel stood above him as before, and an-
swered and said to him, "Whither canst thou flee from
before the Lord? Behold the heavens and the earth
are filled with Him; thou appearest to be acting like
.ܪܓܠ for ܐܓܡ ܢ
.IToux€iov ,. .ܐ ܐܣܛܘܟܣܐ ܃
.ܕܚܠܗ for ܪܚܠܹܗ
,is the name given by the Syrians to the long ܕܠܐ or ܐܠܐ ܀
slender reed which grows in marshy places in Mesopotamia
from four to eight feet high; the Arabs call it . Large
patches of the reed are found in the soft ground between hills
and mountains. A fine example of such a reedy swamp is that
which extends from the Khabur to Buḥairet Khatûnîyyeh, to
the west of the Sinjar Mountains; it affords excellent cover
for wild animals of all kinds. I passed it in the late autumn
of 1890, and the ride occupied more than two hours. Sir Henry
Layard saw a leopard stealing from the high grass at this
place. See Nineveh and Babylon, p. 324.
5. A rare word.
6 All the MSS. have Nanhê, and according to Stoddard
(quoted in Payne Smith, Thes., col. 2387) means "a kind
of hot grass." The word us, or may be a corruption of
µµ. See Dozy,
Pers. or Gr.
Supplement, tom. ii. p. 632, col. 1; Payne Smith, Thes., coll.
223, 229, 2362. Loew in his Aramäische Pflanzennamen, No. 200,
p. 259, gives the form, NYMentha.
<pb n="323"/>
a stupid and ignorant man." Mâr Maran-ammeh said
to him, "Even if I perish like a child of perdition I
will neither become a wicked shepherd, and break the
ankles of my sheep, nor the slayer of innocent lambs
over whom the Holy Spirit has set me in a place of
trust." The angel said to him, "I could take thee now
and place thee, like Habakkuk,' in thy cell, O simple
old man, I do not, however, wish thy service to be
forced but voluntary." <pb type="textAllignment"  n="160"/> And while he was yet
disputing, by means of the spiritual being fire came
round about him, and the thicket began to burn, and
the angel said to him, "Wilt thou go now, or shall I
consume thee with these reeds?" And when the body
of the old man began to wax hot, he promised with
tears to go according to his command, and the angel
took him, and in one moment placed him in the cell
where he lived.
CHAPTER VIII.
OF THE DEPARTURE OF THE BLESSED MAR MARAN-AMMEH
TO THE COUNTRY OF MARGA, AND OF THE MIRACLES WHICH
TOOK PLACE THERE BY HIS HANDS.
Now when the holy man had returned from his
flight, and had tarried a little he prepared himself to
go forth to the mournful and sorrowful work which
had been sent to him; and he crossed the Záb, and
made his way direct to the province beyond the Zâb²
* See Bel and the Dragon, verse 39.
* Read and see Hoffmann, Auszuge, p. 227; and
B. O., . 1, p. 485, col. 1 (Birtha
quae ultra Zabam
fluvium).
<pb n="324"/>which lay to the east of Margå, and went up to a great
village, situated in the mountain, the name of which was
Birtâ. And he passed the night in the church [there]
according to [his] custom, and it appeared to him in
a dream that [one said to him]. "This village is one
of those which have provoked thy Lord, cast into it
one of the arrows of thy curses, and get thee forth
from it early." And with the falling of the sun upon
the earth, he mounted his ass and went forth from it,
and he turned his face towards it, and said, "O village
full of iniquity. nevermore shall the cock, the harbinger
of peace, crow in thee, nevermore shall his voice be
heard in thee; thy inhabitants shall go forth from thee,
and be scattered, and moreover thou shalt nevermore
be inhabited." And with the word of the righteous
man there went forth fire from the four ends of the
village, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="161"/> and burnt up all the houses in a
moment, and behold to this day no man dwelleth
therein.
From this [village] he came to Bêth Ṭēḥûnâi' in
which dwelt certain Shahrighân who possessed many
estates in the country.
And one of these men whose
name was Armenâzwài, had a wife, who was from the
village Képhar 'Uzzel,³ and she was well acquainted with
* Assemânî has which Hoffmann compares doubt-
fully with Tahwânî (Auszüge, p. 238). In the metrical de-
scription of the destruction of this village (Syriac text p. 181,
1. 7) Bêth Țâhônâi is said to have been situated by the side
.ܥܠ ܝܕ ܢܳܗܢܳܐ of a river
* This is a úлoкOPIσTIкóν name composed of 7N + zâd,
>1;; compare Nл Horn and Steindorff, Sassanidische Siegel-
steine, p. 35, Αριάμνης, Αριαμένης: etc.
.ܟܦܪ ܥܘܙܝܠ ܩܪܝܬܐ Read 3
<pb n="325"/>
the holy man; now she was a lady of noble birth.
And there was in the village of Beth Těhûnái a con-
vent of holy women,' and the husband of this woman
used to commit fornication with one of those nuns.
And when the blessed man went into the church, the
wife came to him as to her father and as to the one
who had reared her, and began to make an accusation
against her husband concerning the secret unchastity
which he wrought, and that he had forsaken her and
was working fornication. And he called the man before
him, and began to rebuke and to reprove him, saying,
"Thou art not acting rightly, for instead of [the] law-
ful union, thou makest Satan to rejoice through [thy]
corrupt union with strangers; moreover thou hast con-
demned thine own soul, and wilt be cast³ forth from
being a member of His household." Now Arměnâzwâi,
instead of receiving the rebuke, and confessing his sin,
and asking [pardon] with prayers, and promising re-
pentance, abused the holy man with foul names, and
also lifted up his hand to strike him. And the holy
man answered and said to him, "I trust in our Lord
that thou and all thy village shall go down alive' into
Sheol, like Korah, Dathan, and Abiram."6 And when
Literally "a convent of daughters of the covenant."
See Assemânî, B. O., iii. ii. p. 892 (De Monialibus); and
Kayser, Die Canones Jacob's von Edessa, Leipzig, 1886, pp.
110-112. Among the modern Nestorians nunneries seem not
to exist. See Badger, Nestorians, vol. ii. p. 170.
* M for M.
ܐܪܝܡ Read ܀
3 Strike out the point after
5 For examples of ✓ used as an adverb see Payne Smith,
Thes., col. 1256.
Numbers xvi. 32.
<pb n="326"/>the wife saw the cursing of the holy old man, and it
fell upon her ears, she knew that straightway his com-
mand would be carried out, and she answered and said
to him, "Father, what shall I and these my two sons
do?" He said to her, "Get thee forth quickly, and flee
to the Monastery of Ķûrâi,' and tarry not here for an
instant, that ye perish not." <pb type="textAllignment"  n="162"/> And it came to
pass in the morning season, when the reapers were in
the fields, that a sound like unto mighty peals of thunder
was heard, and like that of the earth being rent asunder*
under the village, and the mountain which was above
it gave forth a sound as of falling upon it; and while
the reapers of millet³ were looking on at a distance,
they saw two horsemen mounted on horses of fire hold-
ing swords of fire in their hands; and they stood, one
above the mountain, and one below it.* And the
horseman that was above answered and said to him
that was below, "Do thou destroy from below, and I
will destroy from above;" and thus the village of Bêth
Těḥunâi sank into the earth with its inhabitants unto
this day. Now those who remember these things
told us that for quite two months before this happened,
smoke and stinking vapours were ascending from the
village; and [its destruction] became a proverb and a
saying for ever.
* See supra, Book iii. chap. 2, p. 296.
* All the MSS. have, but we must read either
,5 .1 ,182 .Syriac text p ܘܐܬܦܚܬܲܬ compare( ܕܐܬܚܬ rܘ ܕܡܬܦܚܬܼܵܐ
and Brit. Mus. MS. No. 17, 153, fol. 696, col. I, l. 19), for
the roots and are unknown.
3 o 45, 104,
p. 101.
* Read, with BC,
. See Loew, Pflanzennamen, No. 72,
<pb n="327"/>
And from this [village] he departed and came to
Bêth 'Ainâthâ,' a village in the neighbourhood of the
village of Bâshôsh,' and Mâr Måran-ammeh had a
vision concerning it. And as he was riding along he
stood upon a hill above the village, and lifting up his
hand against it, he cursed it, saying, "The Lord shall
make mighty winds to blow upon thee, and all thy
houses shall be swept away, all thine inhabitants shall
perish, and thou shalt never [again] be inhabited to
the end of time, and all thy lands shall the village
Bâshôsh inherit." And it came to pass in the night
which followed that day that a mighty south wind
came upon it, and destroyed it and wasted it, and it
became an inheritance for the people of Bâshôsh to
this day.
And he was also commanded by the spiritual being
to destroy another village in the neighbourhood of
Bâshosh, which was called Ḥabbushtâ,3 and this he did
with words of wrath and destruction.
And he left this village also, and it appeared to
him in a vision that he should go to the village of
Bêth Edre. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="163"/> Now this was the [native] village
For Bêth 'Ainâthâ of Bêth Zabhdai see Bk. i. chap. 7,
supra, p. 46.
à See supra, p. 217.
ian
3 Assemânî gives (B. O., iii. 1, p. 485, col. 1)
Hebhshushta, i. e., "scarab", but both here, and in the Syriac
text p. 182, 1. 9, the other MSS have
The reading
given by Assemânî is probably the more correct. For the "Beetle
Monastery,"
see Bar-Hebraeus, Chronicon, ed. Bedjan,
P. 517, l. 16.
+ A school was founded here by Mâr Bâbhai: see Book iii.
chap. 2, p. 296.
<pb n="328"/>of the father of the holy Mår Abraham, the Catholicus*
in our days, and the name of his father was Shâbhôr,
and that of his brother was Ķenârgh.' And concern-
ing this man, a certain priest whose name was Emmanuel,
from the village of Bashôsh, told me that, "during the
whole course of his life he worshipped the sun, and
that he bowed down to the east, in the morning when
it rose, to the south at mid-day, and to the west in
the evening; finally he became a heathen and [after-
wards] a preacher." And the blessed Mâran-ammeh
came to the village of these men. Now there was in
it a small school,³ and twelve scholars and their teacher,
and he went into it when the teacher was making
ready to have a passage* read from the Bible, and the
passage was from Isaiah. And the blessed man asked
him what passage he was going to read, and [when
he had told him] Mar Maran-ammeh said, "Leave this
passage to-day, and begin from where I will shew thee."
And he opened out the Book and shewed him [the
passage], "Howl, ○ village; 6 cry out and complain, O
* He was appointed Catholicus A. H. 222-A. D. 836 and
sat for nearly thirteen years. According to Bar-Hebraeus,
(Chron. Eccles., ii. col 189) "he was a pure and venerable man,
but on account of his lack of knowledge failed to govern the
Church;" before he ascended the patriarchal throne he was
Bishop of al-Haditha. See B. O., iii. 1, p. 508.
2
seems to be the title of a high office; compare
Kanarang-xavapas. See Nöldeke, Geschichte
der Perser, p. 442, note 5.
Pers.
3 Probably the school founded by Mâr Babhai; see supra, p. 296.
5
פָּרָשָׁה - אין *
literally, to open out a way.
6 Isaiah xiv. 31.
<pb n="329"/>
village; all Philistia is troubled; for smoke cometh forth
from the north, and there is in thee no one person of
his who striveth," and he added the passage which
cometh after it. And when he had finished, he an-
swered and said to the teacher and to the scholars,
"Get ye forth from this village, and go to Shalmath
which is above you, for the ruin of the lords of the
village is nigh." And on the following day men came
from the north as they had read, and slew Shâbhôr,
the lord of the village, and it became a ruin, and to
this day no man dwelleth therein.
And from this village he came to Mayâ Ķarîrê,*
the village of the honourable Zâdhaî,³ <pb type="textAllignment"  n="164"/> and
there was in it a famous school, and he possessed
seventy and two estates in Margâ, Gôghmal and
Nineveh; now for what sin Mâr Mâran-ammeh cursed
this man is hidden from us. And he answered and
said to him, "Thou shalt fall from all this glory in
which thou art, thy estates' shall be taken from thee,
.ܘܠܝܬ ܕܝܚܝܪܝ ܒܟܝ ܒܥܕܥܪܘܗܝ The Peshittá has -
2 A place between Mardin and Âmid. Concerning its pleas-
ant situation compare "cum ad nemorosum quendam locum
vineis arbustisque pomiferis consitum Meiacarire nomine venis-
semus, cui fontes dedere vocabulum gelidi". Ammianus Marcel-
linus, xviii. 6. 16.
3 I. c., dugly.
a place situated on Tell Gómel, about 4oor ܓܘܡܠ ܫܘ ,ܓܘܓܞܠ 4
50 miles east of Môşul; here, however, Thomas of Margâ means
the whole district of the Gômel valley. See Hoffmann, Auszüge,
note 1534, p. 194; the map in Sachau's Reise, in which Kiepert
has fixed the exact position of this town; and B. O., ii.
p. LXXXIV, and p. 419.
.ܘܩܘܪ̈ܝܟ Read 5
tt
<pb n="330"/>and finally thou shalt perish of hunger;" which [thing]
actually took place, to the great astonishment [of all],
for his riches and glory departed, and all his estates
became the property of strangers, and that during his
lifetime and while his eyes could see it. And Shâbhôrân,*
the Shahrigh, from the village of Kôph,³ related to
me concerning this man, that in his old age he came
to such absolute poverty that he must have brought
in the beginning of the fast without bread, if a certain
man of his household had not brought him a handful
of wheat, which he roasted on hot coals, and thus
brought in the fast of forty days."
Now there was in the village which was called
Beth Ķârdagh, a certain heretic' who dwelt upon a
pillar of limestone; now this man had dwelt for many
years on this pillar, but from the swift punishment which
I. e., Shahpuhrân.
2 ✓ box, the first example of the use of the singular of
✓ in Thomas of Marga. The Pehlevi is shahrig, or shahrik,
in Neo-Persian shahri; see Nöldeke, Geschichte der Perser, p. 446.
3 I. e., "Kôb near Akra;" see Badger, Nestorians, vol. I,
p. 101; and Hoffmann, Auszüge, notes 1775, 1793.
I. e., when the first Sunday of Lent came he had not
the"“ ܚܕ ܒܫܒܐ ܕܡܥܠܝ ܨܘܡܐ ܢ ܡܥܠܝ ܨܘܡܐ even bread to begin the fast
first day of the week (i. e., Sunday) of the beginning of
the fast."
5. e., Lent. For the seven fasts of the Nestorians, 1. 20
ship, 2. 2005, 3. Lap 2005, 4. 254 2005, 5. 2 2005,
6. Jam 2005 (or), 7. 2005, see Assemânî, B. O., iii. ii.
p. CCCLXXXVII.
6 Or Bêth Kardagh in Margâ; see Book iii. chap. 2, supra,
p. 297. This district is also called see the Syriac
text p. 183, 1. 5.
I. e., a Jacobite.
<pb n="331"/>
came upon him by the hands of the holy man it was
known that he performed all his labour and his dwell-
ing thereon by the wish of devils. And when he saw
the blessed man, and the multitudes that were with
him, from afar off-now they followed close after him
by reason of the wonderful deeds which he wrought,
and it is said that seventy nobles' of the Shahrighân
and of the Dihķân accompanied him, he understood
that it was the Metropolitan. And he called quickly
to his disciple and said to him, "Run³ fast and quickly
before the Metropolitan of the Nestorians (for behold
he cometh from Mayȧ Ķarîrê), and salute him for me,
saying, Thou knowest, my lord, the obligation by
which I am bound and that it is not easy for me
to come to salute thee; but I entreat thee by the love
of our Lord, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="165"/> to draw near to me that I may
see thee and be blessed by thee'." Now when his dis-
ciple met Mâr Mâran-ammeh at some distance away,
he bowed down before him, and repeated to him
everything which his master had said. And the holy
old man answered and said, "He who withholds a
salutation from his companion forsaketh the fear of
the Highest." Then the man in the pillar-shaped
tower, seeing that the Metropolitan had turned aside
into the road which went to his village, and being
confident that he was coming to visit him, thrust his
head through the window and said to the people of
his village, "Behold how excellent is my manner of life
before God! for behold the head of the wicked Nes-
فقيد
* All the MSS. have DBN, but we should probably read
2 Read, with BC.
.ܪܗܛ imperative of ,ܞܪܛ 3
<pb n="332"/>torians cometh to be blessed by me while ye despise
me, and make a mock of my wishes." Now Shârzâdh,*
who was afterwards, when he became a monk, called
George, and who became Catholicus, with his servants
had gone out to the chase; and when he saw the
Metropolitan he alighted from his horse, and was blessed
by him. And Mår Mâran-ammeh asked him, "Whose
son art thou, my son?" and he said, "I am the son
of Mîhrôi,³ from the village of Hennes;"+ and Mår
Mâran-ammeh said, "Mount thy horse, and come with
us, for we are going to thy village." And when he
had come and stood beneath the man in the tower he
answered and said to the dweller [therein]. "Why didst
thou send after me?" and the man said to him, "That
I might salute thee and ask for thy prayers, O Mâr
Metropolitan." The blessed man said to him, "I have
confidence in the mercy of our Lord, that if, as thou
3 I. e.,
"Lion's son". In B. O., iii. I, p. 485, col. I,
ܫܪܨܪ ܒܪ ܡܝܗܪܘܩ he is said to have been the son of Maihrik
See Horn and Steindorff, Sassanidische Siegelsteine, p. 41.
2 I. e., George II. He is said to have been born in Karkhâ
and surnamed all Ibn-Essiah. He became a monk in
the Monastery of Bêth 'Abhê, and rose to the dignity of abbot.
He was ordained Metropolitan of Gundêshâbhôr by Timothy
the Patriarch, and was elected Patriarch A. H. 210-A. D. 825,
and sat for seven years (See B. O., ii. p. 435, col. 2). He
died aged one hundred years, and was buried in the Monastery
of Kelil-lsho'. Bar-Hebraeus (Chron. Eccles., ii. col. 187) says
that he sat for forty years, but this is a mistake, as we see
from the marginal note in Codex L.
3 In the Book of the Bee, (ed. Budge, p. 93 text, 1. 6), the form
Mihârôk occurs. Compare Dadhuk, Hoffmann, Aus-
züge, note 278; and Nöldeke, Geschichte der Perser, p. 11.
* See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 223, and supra, p. 297, note 3.
<pb n="333"/>
sayest, thou didst call me for the sake of greeting and
love, our Lord will cleanse thy heart from [thy] blas-
phemy concerning His manhood, so that thou mayest
understand Him [as] God and Man in one person of
holy sonship; that He will make thee a member of the
household of the true faith which we hold; that for
all thy labour up to this day propitiation may be made,
and that it may be acceptable before Him; and that
He may hold thee worthy of the enjoyment of His
kingdom with His saints. But if, on the other hand,
thou hast, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="166"/> in the scorn of thy boasting, acted
in a scoffing manner,' may the Lord smite with hail-
stones this tower upon which thou dwellest outside the
doctrine of orthodoxy, and may it fall and be destroyed;
and may fire go forth from the hail and consume thy
body, and mayest thou be a reproach and a byword
for all generations which shall come after." And those
who were spectators tell me that with the word of the
blessed old man, there appeared a little black cloud
rising up and coming from Mount Matthew, 3 and mighty
thunders roared, and blazing lightnings played round
about it, and it came on and rested over that pillar.
And the stones of which it was built were rent asunder
and scattered abroad by mighty and violent hail-stones,
and fire went forth from the hail, and set fire to the
body of that wretched man and consumed it; and
*
scoffingly. There is no example of this word in
Payne Smith's Thesaurus.
ܒܟܕܐ Read -
I.e., Gebel Maklub. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 175, note 1371.
* On the margin of the MSS. is written a verse in dodecasyl-
labic metre which reads:-"The most pious Metropolitan Maran-
'ammeh, who excelled in mighty deeds, who was fertile in
<pb n="334"/>thus he became a mockery and a byword according
to the curse [laid] upon him by the old man. Then
Shârzàdh, that is [to say] George, when he saw the
storm, and the things which had taken place, answered
and said to the Metropolitan, “Is the power which
cleaveth to the saints so mighty as this?" and the
Metropolitan said, "My son, what hast thou seen yet
of the deeds of the Apostles?" And George said to
him, "If it be thus, as the Lord liveth, I will become
a monk, and I will renounce the world, and everything
that I have." The holy man said to him, "If now thou
wilt do as thou sayest, and wilt make thyself a monk,
our Lord will make thee the head of all His church;"
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="167"/> and the prophecy of the holy man actually
happened to the blessed Shârzadh. For he went and
became a disciple in the monastery of Beth 'Abhê, and
when he had become the head of the monastery he
said to the monks who were in his monastery, "My
foot hath begun to tread the ladder of preferment ac-
cording to the word of the blessed Mâran-ammeh;"
and when he had been Metropolitan of Elam for twenty-
five years, he sent to the sons of his monastery, saying,
"Another step is reserved for me, according to the
word of the holy man." And when Rabban İsho bar-
Non died, this George
became Patriarch after him,
marvellous acts of strength, who spake and burned up him that
dwelt insolently in a tower, avenged the blood of the righteous
Mar Nestorius."
I. e., "How very little of this power of the Apostles hast
thou seen even now!"
İsho' bar-Non was a native of Bêth Gabbarê, a village in
the district of Nineveh, and lived for thirty-eight years in the
Monastery of Sa'id near Môșul. He maintained a controversy
<pb n="335"/>
and he sent to his monastery, saying, "See, my brethren,
the prophecy of Mâr Mâran-ammeh concerning me has,
in very deed, been fulfilled."
Now therefore the blessed Mår Mâran-ammeh went
forth from Hennes, and he went up in anger to the
province of Birtâ,' against the village of Heṭrê, and
against it he also cast the arrow of his curses, saying,
"There shall never be bread in thee, and the life of
everyone who shall dare to dwell in thee shall perish
by famine and sickness;" and this village also was clothed
with the curse, and it became a ruin for ever. And
from these [deeds] the blessed man returned to his
habitation like a valiant soldier, who had destroyed
the enemies of his lord, and who had overthrown their
lands for ever, and who had scattered to every wind
those that were left.
CHAPTER IX.
OF THE DROUGHT AND FAMINE WHICH TOOK PLACE IN
THE DAYS OF THE HOLY MÂR MARAN-AMMEH, AND OF
THE WONDER WHICH HE SHEWED BY HIS STAFF.
Now in the time of the extreme old age of the
holy man there took place in the countries of his
against the Catholicus Timothy whom, playing upon his name,
he called Talêmathêôs or "God-reviler," and when Timothy
died he was elected Catholicus A. D. 820. He sat four years,
and died aged eighty-four years; he was buried in the Mon-
astery of Kelil-Îsho' (See B. O., ii. pp. 434, 435; Bar-Hebraeus,
Chron. Eccles., ii. col. 181). For 'Abhd-Ishô's list of his works
see B. O., iii. 1, p. 165.
'See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 227.
.ܥܘܩܐ but read ,ܥܘܬܩܐ All the MSS. have 2
<pb n="336"/>dominion the great drought which is called by the
Elders the "first drought", since this took place following
The ox is a hot, dry wind which dries up every pool
and watercourse, and parches the ground, and destroys all
vegetable life; in Deuteronomy xxviii. 22 it is mentioned with
fever, fiery heat and mildew. Its effect upon the wheat crops
may be gathered from Joshua the Stylite, who says that "in
the month of yâr (May, A. D. 501) there blew a hot wind
for three days, and all the corn of our land was dried up save
ܢܦܩܬ ܪܘܚܐ ܕܫܘܒܐ ܝܘܡܬܐ ܬܠܐ ܡܫܒ ܟܠܗ ܥܒܘܪܐ ܕܐܬܪܢ.",in a few places
kan kop (ed. Wright, text p. 41, translation, p. 35).
The country round about Môșul has always been, and is still,
peculiarly liable to great famines. The wind first dries up
everything, then the locusts appear, and after them the cholera.
The terrible famine which took place there a few years ago,
when the British Vice-Consul Mr. Russell acted so nobly, is
so recent that it scarcely needs to be mentioned; those who
are interested in the subject may, however, find details in Sachau,
Reise in Mesopotamien, p. 344.
According to Bar-Hebraeus, (Chronicle, text, ed. Bruns,
p. 123) in the year 721 the water supply failed, and the vill-
agers were obliged to go a distance of seven miles to fetch
I water. In the same year wheat and grain were very scarce, and
in the following year the locusts came in great numbers. Two
years later there was a great pestilence in Mesopotamia. In
the year 784 flying locusts came and destroyed the crops, and
made their way up the walls and through doors and windows
into the houses which were filled with them. They filled all the
water vessels, and having entered the houses from the south
side they left them from the north side; having eaten up the
grass and trees, they even devoured woollen garments and
clothes. Three years after this plague a mighty famine took
place. (B. H., Chronicle, text, p. 134) About the year 842
there was a "mighty famine and terrible pestilence and suffer-
ing by reason of the heavy taxes and exactions of the rebels"
(B. H., Chronicle, text, p. 160). In A. H. 234 there blew over
the whole of Mesopotamia "a mighty, hot wind the like of
<pb n="337"/>
the two hundred and fourth year of the Arabs;' <pb type="textAllignment"  n="168"/>
and the famine waxed very great during the drought, and
slew many by its severity. And when the blessed man
saw the orphans and widows that were dying of hunger,
he rose up and went to Ḥesnâ 'Ebhrâyâ,' and he
began to go round and to ask alms of the believers,
wherewith he might feed the orphans and poor people
which none remembered ever to have blown before," (4)
see Gottwaldt, Hamsae ; شديدة وسَمُوم لم يعهد قبلها مثلها
Ispahanensis Annalium, Leipzig, 1844, vol. I, p. 188; Abù-'l-
Mahâsm, ed. Juynboll, vol. 1, p. 801; and Bar-Hebraeus, His-
toria Dynastiarum, Oxford 1663, pp. 92, 93, 94, 98.
I. e., A. D. 819, Hoffmann thinks we should read
J520 as "two hundred and thirty-fourth year (i. e., A.
D. 848)." See the preceding note.
I. ., the "Hebrew Fortress." Thomas of Margâ may
refer to the Jewish community living round about Nebi Yûnus.
This mound is called, or in Syriac (A DA “the
mound of repentance," because the prophet Jonah is said to
have gathered the Ninevites together, and to have preached to
them there, after which they repented. The position of the
is described دیر یونس بن مَتَّى Monastery of Yunus ibn-Mattain
in Yâķût, ii. p. 810. The fountain of Yûnus is about one mile
distant from the mound; see Voyages d'ibn Batoutah, ed. Defré-
mery, tom. ii. p. 137. Nebi Yunus is within the walls which mark
the site of the ancient Nineveh, and is opposite Kouyunjik (Koyun-
shik) and Mosul. The excavations which have been made there
I have brought to light inscriptions of Sennacherib and Esarhaddon.
For a description of the plaee see Tuch, De Nino Urbe, p. 50;
Rich, Narrative of a Residence, vol. ii. p. 44; Sandreczki, Reise
nach Mosul, part ii. p. 48; Sachau, Reise in Mesopotamien, p. 343.
It is also possible that the words "Hebrew Fortress" may refer to
the mound of Kouyunjik, upon which stood the sale or
"Nineveh Castle;" the mound was called pop the
تل نینوی or حصن نینوی hill of the Nineveh Fortress, or
See Rich, Narrative, vol. ii. p. 55; Bar-Hebraeus, Historia
uu
<pb n="338"/>of his country. And because they were well acquainted
with his greatness, and with the Apostolic wonders and
mighty deeds which he wrought, the believing lovers
of God gave to him abundantly.' And when he had
collected much money, and went forth to come [to his
own country], certain thieves who had watched him
from Môşul to Beth Tartar of the Ninevites, went
before him on the road, and lay hidden in a mountain
hollow and watched for him to pass by. And when-
he passed by singing a psalm, they knew that he had
none of his property with him; but when his disciples
entered that hollow, the thieves rose up and laid hold
upon the possessions which were under them. And
his disciples cried out to him, and he turned back and
saw the thieves making ready to carry off everything
that he had with him. And he said to his disciples,
"Give me my staff;" and when they had given it to
him, he tied his turban cloth around the top of it,
and threw it towards heaven in anger. And he began
to weep, saying, "My soul abhorreth that which troubl-
eth it; how many are they increased who trouble
me; how many are my days in which thou dost not
depart from me, and in which I do not see evil days?*
Dynastiarum, pp. 404, 441; and Tuch, De Nino Urbe, p. 49.
In Bk. iv. chap. 5
is said to be in "Nineveh" and in
Bk. v. chap. 2 it is said to be a "town" upes.
الثرثار Compare :
.ܫܦܝܥܐܝܬܐ
.ܘܘܠܐ in Neo-Syriac ,ܕܓܘܠܐ 3
See Hoffmann, Auszüge,
note 1794, p. 225; and Nöldeke, Grammatik der Neusyrischen
Sprache, p. 39.
* Job. vi. 7.
5 Psalm iii. I.
6 Psalm cxix. 84.
7 Compare Job vii. 19.
8 Compare Proverbs xv. 15; Ecclesiastes xii. I.
<pb n="339"/>
for behold now thou hast delivered the alms' which
I have begged for the poor into the hands of the
spoilers." Now the rod stood between earth and heaven,
and a gentle wind was blowing towards the holy man,
but sparks of fire came forth from the knotted fringes
of the turban cloth, and smote³ the thieves in their
faces. And when they saw this wonder they were. in
great fear, and they let go their hands from the mules,
and asked for alms from him like wretched beggars,
saying, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="169"/> "Consider us also, ○ blessed man, like
those poor people to whom thou art carrying this
money, and give us alms from it, for it is through
hunger that we have done this." And he commanded
his disciples, and they gave money to them, and thus
those thieves turned back, and travelled on their way
rejoicing; and when they came to their habitation they
proclaimed continually throughout the whole country
the wonderful thing which the blessed man had wrought.
These are [some of] the glorious things of the holy
Már Maran ammeh, and these are the miracles which
1. c., what is obtained by begging. Payne Smith
prefers the form 2 (Thes., col. 1205).
(كفية)
ܣܣܐ from the singular ܣܘܞܝ - ܣܘܣܝ
2, "the knotted fringe or tassels of the Kaffiyyel
or turban cloth."
or . Compare Top, ND, glomi filorum, (Buxtorf, ed. Fischer,
p. 737, col. 2; Levy, Chald. Wörterbuch, p. 159, col. 2), and
Payne Smith, Thesaurus, col. 2682. In the east
to this day kaffiyyehs are woven with long fringes, and when
the purchaser has made his selection, the merchant hands it
over to a man or woman who plaits the fringe into thin cords,
each of which he knots at the end, or works it into a little
round ball which is often sewn over with coloured silks and
thread of gold.
.ܡܚܝ for ܡܚ ܪ
<pb n="340"/>he wrought; it is evident that we have only written
down some few of them, for the complete accounts
have been blotted out through the lapse of time, and
through the remissness of scribes who have neglected
to set down in writing for us [all] the noble acts of
the blessed man.
CHAPTER X.
OF THE SICKNESS WHICH SMOTE THE HOLY MAN, AND OF
HIS DEPARTURE FROM THIS LIFE OF TIME TO THAT OF
ETERNITY.
Now when the blessed man had arrived at infirm
old age, after he had laboured prosperously in the
vineyard of his Lord from the breasts and from tender
childhood to the evening of advanced old age, the
glorious end of his contests drew near and arrived.
And he perceived the beginning of his fatal sickness,
and commanded and they prepared an animal for him
to ride upon, and he went to the Monastery of Bârķâ³
with the hope that he would gain benefit from drinking
the waters of the Tigris. Now when he had tarried
there ten days, and saw that every day he was going
backwards, he rose up to come to his country, and
3
literally "soft nails," i. e., from babyhood and
tenderest childhood. The expression also occurs in Bar-Hebraeus,
Chran. Eccles., I. col. 729, l. 14, and is applied to one whom
Dionysius had taught from his earliest childhood in his cell.
* Literally, "a mount." - Sp.
3 See Book iii. chap. 5, supra, p. 317. This monastery was
probably situated near some sulphur spring close to the Tigris.
Between Môșul and Tekrît are many such, and a daily draught
of the water or bath is most beneficial in many diseases.
<pb n="341"/>
when he arrived at the village of Beth Rêwai,' he
I went in to lie there for the night. And when the in-
habitants of Rêwâi saw that his departure from [this]
life was at hand, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="170"/> they would not allow him
to depart from them; and with all manner of reasons
and deeds they worked that he might finish his course
with them, and that his holy body might be laid in
their church. And Mâr Mâran-ammeh sent secretly
to Lôhrâsâph, and he came to him; and while Lôhr-
âsâph was weeping in his presence, because he saw
that he was already laid in the chamber of the tomb,
the holy man quieted him, and whispered to him, say-
ing, "I desire and very much wish to lie in thy church,
and it is also the will of our Lord that I should be
laid there, for thy village is about to become a very
rich and much inhabited place; but these villagers are
scheming³ and planning all manner of devices so as
not to allow me to depart from here. Do thou then
ask for thy ten thousand zûzê from me, and demand
from them either that they shall give thee ten thou-
sand zúzê, and that thou shalt leave me here to them,
or that they shall allow thee to carry me with thee to
thy village." And Lôhrâsâph began to speak to the
Metropolitan in an audible voice, saying, "Master, give³
me that money, ten thousand zûzê, which thou didst
borrow from me before thy departure, give it to me,
• Rêwâi appears to be a diminutive formed from some name;
compare Rêw-Ardashîr.
21. e., Luhrâsp, ((__)); for this name see Hoffmann, Aus-
züge, p. 150; and Nöldeke, Geschichte der Perser, p. 2.
.ܡܬܦܪܣܝ Read 3
ܞܒܚܘ 5
4, drachmas or dirhams.
<pb n="342"/>for it is my children's means of subsistence;" and the
Metropolitan promised, saying, "I am in debt to thee,
carry me away that I may go and give thee the money."
And when the inhabitants of Rêwâi began to prevent
him, the holy man said to them, "If ye wish to keep
me back give this nobleman the ten thousand zûzê
which I owe him, or depart from me that I may go
and give them to him while I am alive." Now the in-
habitants of Rêwâi were poor and were wholly unable
to do this, and he commanded that they should prepare
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="171"/> an animal for him to ride on," and when he had
come half way on the road, the soul of the blessed man
departed, and went by the hands of holy angels with
spiritual hymns of praise to Paradise, and rested with
the spirits and souls of the righteous who have been
made perfect. And the nobles and the dahķânė of
the village, together with the multitudes who came
from the estates round about, paid honour to his holy
body, and bore it with the ceremony which befitted
the greatness of his person, and laid it in the
church close by the (кαтάσтршμα)³ of the
* Read
2. According to Bar-Bahlûl (Brit. Mus. Or. 2441, fol. 3436,
col. 1) is the name given to the "two balustrades (or
banisters), between which the steps were built"
¾ (sic)
159a, col. 2, says that
paža
. Another lexicon, Brit. Mus. Add. 7203, fol.
is "the raised platform (or dais) which
and ; المَصْطَبَة التي قدام باب المدح is before the door of the
altar
".the altar المذبح by
-
India Office Lexicon, fol. 116, col. 2, explains both and his
in Ezechiel viii. 16;
on is the whole area of the church before the
(not the place where the seats of the clergy stand), and
was the raised or built up floor of the choir upon which the
Joel ii. 17.
<pb n="343"/>
(xórxn), on the right hand side, that it might be in this
altar of sacrifice, stood. (Compare Σwhéac, Pars templi
quae Bemati observatur, quae uno aut altero gradu aedis sacrae
pavimento eductior est. Bijua Sacrarium, Locus in templo ubi
consistant sacerdotes, et quem nulli Laïco ingredi fas erat. Du
Cange, Glossarium, coll. 195, 1513). The also included
them, and its pavement was three steps above the
pavement of the rest of the church. (See B. O., iii. ii. p. 802,
note 1). seems to mean primarily a "tiled pavement"
(compare Bekker, Anccdota Graeca, Tom. I. p. 269, 1. 27, where
καλαμίδας is explained by ἢ τοὺς θηλυκοὺς καλάμους τοὺς πρὸς
σύνδεσμον τῶν πλινθίνων καταστρωμάτων τῆς οἰκοδομίας), and
cannot be older than the ἔδαφος πλινθοις καταστρωμένον which was
laid on the ground before the temple where the altar of burnt
sacrifice was placed. is also the "deck of a vessel;"
compare καταστρώματα, τῆς νεώς μέρος, ἐν ᾧ ἑστῶτες ναυμα-
XOÛσiv, Hesychius, Lexicon, ed. Schmidt, Jena, 1857, p. 435.
On men-of-war the катάσтршμα must have been the uppermost
deck of all, as the combatants were posted on it when the
ship went into action: see Thucydides, i. 49. 1,3; Polybios, i.
44. 3; Plutarch, Themistocles, 14, Antonius, 67. On merchant-
men the катάσтршμа must also have been the uppermost deck,
for the depth of the ship was reckoned from the катάστρшμа to
the bottom of the hold: see Lucian, navigium, V. See also
Kraus, Real-Encyklopädie der Christlichen Alterthümer, Freiburg
in Breisgau, 1880, articles AMBQN, BHMA (vol. 1, pp. 43-46),
and Basilica (vol. 1, pp. 109-143); De Vogüé, Syrie Centrale,
Planches 119, 126, 138; L'Eglise de Saint-Jérémie à Abou-
Gosch (Emmaus), with plans, by C. Mauss in Revue Archéologique,
3ième Série, Tom. xix. p. 223 ff. and Assemânî, B. O., iii. 1, p. 537,
capp. 3 and 5; iii. ii. pp. 795, 821,835. In Assemânî, Codex Liturgi-
cus, tom. ix. Appendix, p. 281, note 2, we have
explained by Cancellos "qui Ecclesiae Sanctuariam a Navi, seu
loco fidelium separant."
comes the Arabic ܩܣܛܪܘܡܐ From
balustrade en bois ou en bronze autour du cénotaphe d'un
saint. Dozy, Supplément, tom. ii. p. 358, col. 2.
The
was included in the boon, and strictly speak-
<pb n="344"/>world before the face of the Lord in His holy temple as
long as the world endureth, even as he will be on the
right hand of the King of Kings, Jesus Christ, for everlast-
ing, in that world where there is no space of time
to be divided into seasons and years; and his holy
body is a fountain of help for the afflicted and dis-
eased, and a strong wall to the whole village. Let us
praise God, the Lord of all, Who made the holy
man victorious, and the honourable Ḥasan who zealously
encouraged setting down his history in writing, that
his glorious acts and deeds might not flee into oblivion,
but that they might all be brought to light. May we
be preserved from every harmful thing in this world
by his prayers, and in the next may we be neighbours
in the happiness which God hath prepared for the holy
man; and may we all together praise and glorify our
Lord Jesus Christ, and may His grace and mercy be
with us all, now and always, for ever and ever! Amen.
'Here endeth the history of the similitude of the
manner of life of the holy and pious Mâr Mâran-
'ammeh, Metropolitan Bishop of Adiabene; to God
be glory, and upon us His mercy, Amen!
ing, meant the beginning of the
Smith, Thes., col. 2727; and be
compare, Payne
“limina Cancellorum,"
B. O., iii. ii. p. 821, 1. 28. In Brit. Mus. Or. 2441, fol. 342b,
متن . عة موحدة بيت المذبح وهو البيت المقدس col. 2, we have
المحترم الذى لا يلجه الا الكهنه و ارباب الراب وهو مميا من جيرة
I
Neverlastingly. A rare word.
<pb n="345"/>
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="172"/> A METRICAL HOMILY' ALSO UPON THE HOLY MARAN-
‘AMMEH WHICH WAS COMPOSED BY MAR THOMAS,
BISHOP OF MARGA.
RESPONSE. MAY WE FIND MERCY THROUGH THE PRAYERS OF THE PRIEST
WHOSE COMMEMORATION IS CELEBRATED WITH GREAT HONOUR IN
OUR CONGREGATION.
MY BRETHREN, BLESS YE THE LORD!
○ lovers of truth, bring near to my wretchedness
the entreaty of truth,
That I may weave with my words a crown of the
praises of the pious man.
The children of the nobility of this world, and of
that of Christ,
Have asked from me a petition wholly full of the
love of the righteous man.
The guests of light, and those who enjoy the Living
Mystery
Have made me the means [of recounting] the glorious
praises of the noble labourer.
The children of the right hand have urged my un-
instructed right hand
To paint a picture of his perfection full of beauty.
The chief of pastors, and the father of priests, Máran-
'ammeh.
10 The man who was pre-eminent in the Holy Church,
they wish to praise.
The watchful shepherd, and steward of the trea-
sures of the Spirit,
In dodecasyllabic metre.
cantus responsorius, sic dictus "quod uno canente
chorus consonando respondeat." Payne Smith. Thes., col. 2927.
Read
.erirpofog = ܐܦܛܪܘܦܐ 4
xx
<pb n="346"/>Their command seeketh to crown by means of our
speech.
To the angel of light, to the pure and entirely holy
man,
May they and I devote our words on the day of
his commemoration.
15 And with the offering and sacrifice of truth, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="173"/>
which his vigil requireth,
We will compose a discourse in which [his] contests
shall be sung.
And while with my mouth and understanding I take
refuge in his prayer,
May my tongue well up with a pleasing discourse
on his glorious deeds.
May my feeble speech travel on with his history,
20 And may it repeat the stories concerning him, in
order, even as they were performed.
The holy man sprang from Ḥatre a city in Ţîrhân,³
From a family and holy race of righteous men.
Mâran ammeh was he named by his parents,
And as in prophecy [he was named] with a noble
name [so also] his person was distinguished.
25 Our Lord Jesus was with him, and chose him for
Himself,
And from his youth up He set him aside and sancti-
fied him for His household.
To be a member of His heavenly household was the
holy man worthy,
ο κολλας και άθλησις.
* See Hoffmann, Auszüge, note 1440, p. 184; and supra, p. 305.
3 I. c. b. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, note 1508, p. 191;
De Goeje, Bibl. Geogr. Arabicorum, pars vi. p. 245, 1. 6.
4 Read A reads "from a beautiful root."
<pb n="347"/>
And as he grew in bodily stature he increased in
the doctrine of Life.
And when the beloved youth had arrived at early
manhood,
30 He forsook his parents, and friends, and relations,'
and kinsmen.
He despised and contemned the love of the world
which passeth away,
And he fastened his love upon Him that had chosen
him, as upon an anchor.*
The love of his Lord inflamed the mind of the noble
labourer,
And he began to walk on the way of life as to
heaven.
35 Now at that time the much enlightened Rabban
Bâbhai³
Was praised by many on account of his teaching.
In his city Gĕbhîltâ <pb type="textAllignment"  n="174"/> the teacher of truth
founded a school,*
And like the Tigris a fountain of learning flowed
from his belly.
By the theory and practice of his teaching
40 He made the truth of his enlightenment shine upon
many.
Towards this man did [Mâr Mâran-ammeh] direct the
impetus of his steps at the beginning of his way,
That he might be his disciple as was Joshua' of
Moses the Great,
2 Read ol, Talm. DuPIN-ŎYKIVOS. For the forms
of the word see Payne Smith, Thes., col. 88.
3 See Book iii. chaps. 1-3, supra, pp. 289-298.
5 Deut. xxxiv. 9.
+ Read.
<pb n="348"/>Before this [man] he was instructed in the writings of
the Spirit,
And in the expositions of Theodore,' the scribe of
truth.
* Theodore was born at Antioch, and was the son of wealthy
parents. He succeeded Olympius as Bishop of Mopsuestia in
Cilicia about A. D. 394, and died A. D. 429, having filled the
office of bishop for thirty-six years. In Nestorian writings he
is usually called the "Expositor" (see Budge, Book of the Bee,
p. 140), on account of his having written expositions or com-
mentaries on the greater number of the books of the Bible.
Whatever were his exact opinions upon the Natures of Christ,
it is certain that the Nestorians began at a very early date to
quote them in support of their own views. Ma'nà, a Persian
by race, from the town of Bêth Hardashêr, who was resident
at Edessa in the earlier part of the fifth century, and is men-
tioned by Simeon of Bêth Arsham among the distinguished
Nestorian scholars whom he holds up to ridicule, devoted him;
self to the task of translating into Syriac the commentaries of
Theodore of Mopsuestia during the lifetime of that great theo-
logian (Wright, Syr. Lit., p. 830.). According to 'Abhd-Isho',
Theodore composed in all forty-one volumes. He wrote a
commentary on Genesis in. three volumes; a metaphysical work
a commentary ;ܦܠ ܒܙܢܐ ܘܬܐܘܪܝܐ for the noble Alphaeus entitled
on the Psalms in five volumes for Ķerdûn and his brother; a
commentary on the twelve Minor Prophets in two volumes for
Mår Turis; a commentary on Samuel in one volume for Mamari-
anus; a commentary on Job in two volumes for Cyril of Alex-
andria; a commentary on Ecclesiastes in one volume for Porphyry;
and a commentary on Isaiah, Ezekiel, Jeremiah and Daniel. On
St. Matthew he wrote a commentary for Julius in one volume;
on Luke and John for Eusebius; on the Acts of the Apostles
for Basil; on the Romans for Eusebius; on the two books of
the Corinthians for Theodore; on four letters for Eustratius,
and on Galatians and Ephesians; on Philippians, Colossians and
tqe two books of the Thessalonians for Jacob; on Timothy for
<pb n="349"/>
45 By the vigilance of his mind' was he directed in a
straight line,'
And he received fully the doctrine of the Holy Church.
Now when the Lord stirred up the heart of Rabban
Bâbhai,
To go up to our country, and to sow in it the teach-
ing of Life,
He associated Maran-ammeh with him in that going up,
50 Like Jesus, the son of Jozadak and Zerubbabel.³
They two arrived with many [people] at the country
of Arbela,
And first of all planted a great school in Kephar ‘Uzzêl.
Peter; on Titus, and Philemon, and Hebrews for Cyrinus; and
five volumes on the works of the other apostles. He wrote a
book on the "Sacraments;" another on "Faith;" two volumes on the
"Priesthood;" two volumes on the "Holy Spirit;" one volume
on the "Incarnation;" two volumes against "Eunomius;" two
volumes against those who would say, "Sin is ingrained in
[our] nature;" two volumes "against Magianism;" one volume
"to Monks;" one on "obscure speech" 20202 ; one volume
on "Perfection of manner of life;" five volumes against "Alle-
gorists," ; one volume "on behalf of Basil;" one volume
on "the taker and that which is taken," moms; "the Book
of the Pearl," in which his letters are collected; and a "dis-
course on the laying down of the Law", . See Asse-
mânî, B. O., ii. 1, pp. 30-35; iii. ii. pp. 190, 203, 227, 228;
Bar-Hebraeus, Chron. Eccles., i. col. 124; ii. coll. 58, 64, 74;
Fabricius, Bibl. Graec., vol. x. p. 346ff.; Tillemont, Mémoires,
tom. vi. p. 219 (ed Brussels 1732); and Wright, Catalogue of
Syriac MSS., p. 1329, col. I.
Read
2 an uncommon word.
3 Ezra iii. 2; I Esdras v. 8.
* Arbêl, Irbîl, or Erbil ✓ See Hoffmann. Auszüge,
pp. 231, 233.
<pb n="350"/>And when it flourished with scholars and doctors,"
He left it in the hands of Maran-ammeh and went
away from it.
That he might go and plant other schools like unto it,
And place in them teachers from among his dis-
ciples.
The holy Rabban Bâbhai planted sixty schools,
And established sixty men, teachers of the truth,
in them.
He ordained that Maran-ammeh <pb type="textAllignment"  n="175"/> should be
established in this our [school],"
60 And he departed to Gebhîltâ,3 and there he died.
Måran ammeh became a teacher in this church,
In which his venerable body was laid at the end of
his life.
By the glorious rays of his teaching and manner
of life
Every one round about him shone by the power of
the grace which clave to him.
65 He became a teacher and a preacher of the Spirit,
And he preached and taught the doctrine of his
Lord like Paul.
He planted spiritual cuttings in the courtyards of the
Church,
And he reared them upon the rain and dew which
[fell] from his lips.
,Duval اقول البحاث المفتش العلوم is explained by حجم :
Lexicon, col. 358. See also Hoffmann, Opuscula Nestoriana,
pp. XX. XXI.
½ From this we may perhaps conclude that the village or
town of Kephar ‘Uzzêl was the seat of the Bishop of Marga;
see Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 237, 296.
3 Here we must follow the reading of BC.
<pb n="351"/>
He weaned his body from the dainty things of all
manner of pleasant foods,
70 And by voluntary abstinence from a life of softness
he emaciated his body.
The mind which is devoted to the flesh is wont to
beget a thick belly,
When it remaineth barren' of the mind devoted to
spiritual things.
He sanctified himself to be an offering to the name
of the Creator,
And he cleansed his heart from all the passions of
the body and soul.
75 His thoughts shone like incorporeal light,
He made his feelings' to possess a chaste de-
meanour, and a pure report.
At every moment he made his eyes to be occupied
with the writings of the Spirit,
He also sanctified his hands by means of almsgiving.
His feet had for a firm standing-place truth and
rectitude,
So As it is written concerning his fellows in the writings
of the Spirit.
He became a temple <pb type="textAllignment"  n="176"/> and a pure shrine ac-
cording to the command,
And was a dwellingplace for the Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit,
As our Lord Jesus promised³ to the friends of His
love,
BC read. The metre requires that we should adopt
this reading.
2 All the MSS. have all, but we should probably read
.ܠܪ ܠܫܘܗܝ
St. John xiv. 23.
<pb n="352"/>That they should be a dwelling for His Godhood in
the manner of their lives.
85 Moreover his Lord gave him the [power] of healing
all sicknesses,
And He blessed by his hand also the signs of the
Cross which he made.
From his right hand sicknesses of all kinds fled,
And by his blessings he made the sterile fruitful,
and dried up wombs he made fertile.
And although he excelled in all divine beauties,
90 Praise to his Lord was attributed by all mouths.
And from the labour of teaching the Spirit raised
him up.
To the great glory of the headship of the Holy
Church,
To the throne of Salâkh, the country of Yânes (Jannes)
mentioned by the Apostles."
His Lord distinguished him [as] a good servant to
lead His sheep.
95 The good shepherd received five talents' from the
Spirit,
And like that wise steward he made use of them
with skill and care.
The provisions of time he made use of in an excellent
manner, [being] truly wise,
And there accrued to him the blessing of our Lord
[which is] in the Gospel.³
He went to his country and began to visit the flocks
of his Lord,.
2 Timothy iii. 8.
2 St. Matthew xxv. 15.
St. Matthew
3 "Well done, good and faithful servant:" etc.
XXV. 21.
<pb n="353"/>
100 And to rear them, and to make them increase ac-
cording to the command.
105
He set out for a village which was called Bêth
Nâwâ, and he heard and learned
That one tare had taken root and begun to grow
among the wheat.
He tore up this tare by its root, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="177"/> and gave
it to the fire,
And it became its own murderer, like Saul."
He passed over to another [village], and there
was a young man, the son of a widow,
Being carried out to the grave of the dead, with
great sorrow.
He saw the poor [mother] tearing out her hair
unsparingly,
And crying out upon her only son with tears of
suffering.
"Woe is me, woe is me, my beloved son," she
cried out,³
110 "For after thee I have no other to open or to shut
for me.
"Let the old woman thy mother die with thee, and
not survive thee,
"That her life may not be days full of death.”
The tears streamed from the eyes of the watchful
shepherd for the sake of his ewe,
And he commanded them to take the body back
to the church that he might pray over it.
115 He put out all men and remained alone with the
dead,
*Read. See Bk. iii. chap. 3, supra, p. 308.
1 Samuel, xxxi. 4.
3 Read, with BC.
yy
<pb n="354"/>And began [to pray] with tears and fervent prostrations.'
His Lord Who saw the prayer and the tears which
were offered to Him,
Restored the soul of the young man to its body,
and rejoiced His servant.
With sorrow the earnest master prayed for him
that was lying there,
120 And like Simon [Peter] he made the young man
to stand up like Tabitha.*
He took him by his hand, and gave him to his
mother, like Elijah,³
And all men were turned to the glory of his Lord
with gladness of heart.
He heard concerning certain Paulonians* who were
in the country,
That they did not confess the Godhead of our
Lord Jesus.
125 He went forth to them, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="178"/> and gathered them
together in their church,
And he made a special prayer and service on be-
half of them.
10.
2 Acts ix. 40.
31 Kings xvii. 23.
4
Ελλάδας, κ. e., the followers of Παυλωνάς or Παυλίνος, 2
pupil of Ephraim Syrus (died A. D. 373). Paulonas or Paulinus
is probably the same who is mentioned by 'Abhd-Isho' as
having written "metrical homilies, discourses against inquirers,
disputations against Marcion, and a treatise concerning believers
and the creed."
ܣܡ ܡܕܪܫܐ. ܘܟ̈ܠܐ ܕܠܘܩܒܠ ܪܨܪ̈ܝܐ. ܘܕܪܫܐ ܕܠܘܩܒܠ
;828 .See Wright, Syr. Lit., p : ܡܪܩܝܘܢ. ܘܥܠ ܡܗܝܡܢܐ ܘܗܝܡܢܘܬܐ.
B. O., . 1. pp. 170, 171, note 4; Tillemont, Mémoires, tom. iv.
p. 126; Epiphanius, Haeres., LXXVII; Socrates, Hist. Eccles.,
iii. 6. 9; Sozomen, Hist. Eccles., v. 12. 13, etc. Compare also
25 alas, B. O., iii. 1, p. 120, col. 2, l. 9.
<pb n="355"/>
And our Lord made His glorious light to shine [on
them] as on Paul,
When he went forth to persecute the apostles who
were in Damascus."
They also returned to what was seemly, like Paul,
130 And they confessed Jesus [to be] the God of all,
and the Son of God.
135
He subdued the untamed mule, and it received
the bridle
With quietness and tranquillity, according to his
command.
He drove away from the wall of the holy temple
a nest of ants,
And in a moment they all departed through his
prayers.
And while the tried priest was excelling in such-
like things,
The Spirit lifted him up another step higher than
this.
Metropolitan of all Adiabene, and Margâ, and
Hephton,³
The Spirit entrusted to him to hold the oars of
the elect Church.
And with the advancement from grade to grade of
the pious man, our father
.ܫܠܝܚܐ ܪܒܕܪܡܣܘܩ Read -
* The metre requires us to read as.
3 Read, with Vat. A. Hephton belonged to the district of
Môșul, and the Upper or Great Zâb flowed through it. See
Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 233, 234; and Feige, Die Geschichte
des Mâr Abhdishô und seines Füngers Mar Qardagh, Kiel,
1889, p. 31, note II.
المجاديف لقد »
<pb n="356"/>140 Was also exalted by miracles which were exceed-
ingly sublime.
Before the coming of the mighty man to this country
Certain men dared to seize the mill belonging to
the episcopal house.
And when he saw their avariciousness and obstin-
ate strife [concerning it]
He carried them to the mill that he might shew
them the truth of what he said.
145 "Let us all go to the mill, and it shall teach us
To whom it belongeth and who hath a right to it,
whether you or I".
The believing nobles <pb type="textAllignment"  n="179"/> and also the assembly
of the priests' went with him
That they might see how and what would come
to pass from that which should be wrought.
He adjured the mill, and instead of wheat it ground
out ashes,
150 He commanded it again, and it changed the ashes
to pure flour.
The large assembly of spectators who were with
him marvelled,
And the avaricious men were put to shame, and
left the mill in the hands of the righteous man.
As unto Moses' dumb things of nature were sub-
missive unto him,
crowd, assembly, gathering of priests. Compare
مجلة جمهور الناس جميع ة الله وحقد عوام الناس محفل مه حق
.See Brit Mus .ܒܨܝܚܐ ܟܢܫܐ....ܐܝܟ ܒܪ ܣܪܘܫܘܝ >ܒܢܐ ܩܝܟ ܠܠܥܛܝܬ
MSS. Rich, 7203, fol. 1506, col. 2; and Orient. 2441, fol. 3276,
col. I. The words, which Assemânî renders by
"fidelis plebs", occur in B. O., iii. ii. p. 97, l. 28.
* Exodus vii. 20; viii. 17; Numbers xx. 11; Psalm lxxviii. 20; etc.
<pb n="357"/>
155
And he brought forth from them the power of
wonder and marvel.
In the country of Margâ there were men of evil
life,
The Lord was stirred up to reward them twofold
into their bosom.
He sent one of the Watchers to the soldier of the
Spirit,
That he might arm himself, and make an end of
them by his curses.
The spiritual being came, and manifested himself to
the noble labourer,
160 When he was standing in prayer and vigil according
to his custom.
The holy man saw the spiritual Watcher and mar-
velled and was astonished,
And he asked for what cause he had come to him.
"I am," said he, "the guardian angel
Who ministereth to the throne of this country by
the command of my Lord.
165 And the Nod which ruleth creation and maketh
times to pass away hath sent me,
That thou mayest go and destroy the blind people
who have trodden His laws under foot,
A foolishly wicked and godless people in the country
of Margà
Who by thy hands shall suffer death and destruction.
Take hold of the sword of the Word <pb type="textAllignment"  n="180"/> of
our Lord without pity,"
I. e., angels.
* Read ; compare above line 159.
3
pitilessly; a rare word.
<pb n="358"/>170 And cast down and destroy good and evil men
without sparing."
He made answer to the Watcher, "I cannot do this
deed,
Because the Creator needeth not for power the help
of man.
By the hand of angels He overthrew Sodom and
Gomorrah,"
And now by the hand of the Watchers on high let
Him do this."
175 The Watcher answered, "Do not dispute my words,
For whether thou wilt, or whether thou wilt not,
perforce thou must go".
And when the Watcher had disappeared from him,
he departed and fled,
That he might live the life of an anchorite in the
wilderness far away from men,
Like Jonah when he fled by sea to Tarshish,*
180 That he might not go at his Lord's command to
the city of Nineveh.
The Watcher overtook the blessed old man, and
surrounded him with fire,
Threatening him that if he would not return he
would consume him.
The Lord brought Jonah in the belly of the fish
back to land,
And He terrified our father with fire and he turned
back.
185 The mighty man arose, the charioteer mounted, the
athlete made ready,
* Genesis xix. 24.
Jonah i. 3.
<pb n="359"/>
And he took in his quiver' eight arrows breathing
death,
That he might make them devour the flesh and
blood of evil men,
And perform by them the vengeance of wrath ac-
cording to what they deserved.
Like Joshua, holding the spear after the manner
of a warrior,
190 And being wrathful and full of fighting zeal against
the iniquitous,
He went up to the village, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="181"/> the name of
which was Birtâ, and the Watcher showed him,
[Saying,] "Curse this village and its inhabitants by
the wrath of thy words."
He stood upon a hill and waved his hand like
David,³
He took one arrow from his quiver,' and cursed
the village, and passed on,
195 And at once from every side fire went forth,
And licked it up like stubble, and it came to an
end and perished suddenly.
He came to the village of Bêth Ṭěhunâi, which
is situated on the bank of a river,
I
in Psalm cxxii. 5; Isaiah xxii. 6; xlix. 2,—
"quiver." See Brit. Mus. MSS. Rich, fol. 1546, col. 1;
Orient. 2441, fol. 3346, col. 2.
Joshua viii. 18.
-
+ *** "quiver"
1 Chronicles xviii. 7.
31 Samuel xvii. 50.
in 2 Samuel viii. 7; 2 Kings xi. 10;
ܫܠܛܐ ܒܨܚܐ ܗܘ ܩܛܝܪܩܐ ܒܨܚܐ Compare
جَعْبَة النَّشَّاب وأخر القناديل التى تكون فيها النشبان منع حد
.Brit. Mus MS. Onent ܤܪܘܫܘܝ ܩܛܝܪܩܐ ܕܒܗܘܢ ܡܬܚܡܠܝܢ ܓܐܪܐ ܠܫܟܝܚ
2441, fol. 375a, col. 2.
<pb n="360"/>In this village was a whoremonger who was ex-
ceedingly cruel.
The holy man called him and began to rebuke him,
as he would his sons,"
200 "What I hear thou art doing is not right,
Cease from the way that leadeth to Gehenna, and
return
To that which is proper, and the hatefulness of thy
[past] life shall be forgiven thee."
The wretched man who was worthy of the death of
the Sodomites, turned,
And as Shimei cast dirt at the just man David,"
205 He sent forth his hand like Shimei (?) against the
holy man,
And answered the master and good shepherd with
words of mocking scorn.
[Mâran ammeh] rose up, and went forth and took
a spiritual arrow,
And shot it into him, and cursed him and his
village in great anger,
"Be thou swallowed up in the earth like Abiram*
and the wicked men his companions;
210 Thy village shall be overthrown, and the earth shall
cover it and its inhabitants."
Suddenly there appeared Watchers of fire like
horsemen,
One on the plain, one on the mountain, each facing
each.
* Hoffmann suggests that we should read 24.
22 Samuel xvi. 6.
.ܫܡܥܝ probably a mistake for ܫܡܘܥ 3
Numbers xvi. 32.
<pb n="361"/>
215
220
225
The Watcher above answered, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="182"/> "Thou below,
and I above,
Let us make the village sink into the earth, and
consume its inhabitants within it."
The earth reeled, and gave forth a sound like
the sea.
The mountain which was above the village thunder-
ed with violent thunders.
And the earth was opened' below it, and it was
swallowed up,
And the smoke of it began to go up like that of
Sodom."
Darkness remained above it for sixty days,
The
report flew abroad, like a bird, into all countries.
[Mâran-ammeh] came and arrived at Beth' Ainâthâ
and Ḥabûshtâ, ³
And he sent two arrows flying into them' and
destroyed them.
A violent wind like that of Jobs blew suddenly,
And they fell and were destroyed [and remained]
without inhabitants for ever.
He passed on from these villages to the little
village of Bêth Edhrê,6
And with a sharp arrow he rent it asunder, saying,
"Howl, O village,' complain, ○ village, for thine
inhabitants,
1. See supra, p. 326, note 2.
2 Genesis xix. 28.
3 Read
(?) See supra, p. 327, note 3.
Hoffmann would read.
5 Job. i. 19.
6 See Bk. iii. chap. 8, supra, p. 327, note 4.
7 Isaiah xiv. 31.
22
<pb n="362"/>For thou shalt put on mourning by the reason of
the nearness of complete desolation".
Like Béltéshâṣar' by Darius' on the last³ night,
230 Was slain Shâbhôr, the Lord of the village, and
all who were therein fled.
235
He went forth from these villages and in his
quiver [were] three arrows,
Five had been emptied on the villages which he
had passed and they had destroyed them.
He came to the village of Zâdhỏi the nobleman,
He took an arrow and drew it out from himself
for his bitterness,
He shot it at Zâdhôi, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="183"/> and prophesied to
him what was about to come to pass,
"All the glory with which thou art clothed thou
shalt be made to put away,
And thou shalt live a life of hunger and misery."+
And this happened to the old man Zâdhôi even as
[Mâran-ammeh] had said to him.
* Daniel v. 30. is the Chaldee form of the Baby-
lonian name Bil-shar-uşur, “Bêl, protect the King." See Schrader,
Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament, p. 433; Bevan,
A Short Commentary on the Book of Daniel, p. 99; and for other
Babylonian names containing the name of the god Bêl see
Strassmaier, Inschriften von Nabonidus, König von Babylon,
Heft iv. p. 52.
² Dârîôs, i. e., Aapeîoç. Other forms of the name
are and see Bar-Hebraeus, Chronicon Syriacum, ed.
Bedjan, p. 29; and Budge, History of Alexander, p. 55.
3 Read Another example of the mistake of 1 for
occurs in Budge, History of Alexander, p. 1. line 6, and
note 6.
Read, with Vat. Hope. For the explanation of the word
by Bar 'Ali see Hoffmann, Syr. Arabische Glossen, no. 3067,
p. 109; Duval, Lexicon, col. 539: Payne Smith, Thes., col. 829.
<pb n="363"/>
In Ķårdhâghîâ' there was a man who lived on
a pillar,
240 Like a vulture and an unclean carrion crow seated
on a hill.
He distinguished from afar the star of dawn by his
clear light,
And the son of darkness thought and decided that
he would make a mock of him.
He cried out to his disciple to go out quickly to
meet him,
And to ask him to turn aside to him that he might
be blessed [by him].
245 He saw that the blessed old man had turned aside
to pass by his way,
And he put on boasting, and he laid out his tongue
for blaspheming.
He answered and said to the dwellers in the village
below him,
"Behold, even the head of the Nestorians hath need
of my salutation,
While in your opinion, I am of little worth, and
despicable, and of small account,
250 And ye do not confess the hidden power in which
I dwell."
• I. c., ; see supra, p. 330.
2. This bird, according to Physiologus, lives "in high
or as ,ܫܩܝܦܐ ܪܡܐ ܘܡܫܩܠܐ ܥܪܪ "rocks and loftry mountain peaks
the Ethiopic runs ይነብር : ውስተ : አድባር : ነዋኃት : ወየዐይል ፡ ውስተ ፡
ዐበይት ፡ ወኖመ ፡ ውስተ ፡ ድንጋገ : ደብር። “dwells on high mountains,
and flies about lofty places, and sleeps in the rock;" see Land,
Anecdota, vol. iv. p. 61; Hommel, Die Aeth. Uebersetzung des
Physiologus, p. 18; and Ahrens, Das Buch der Naturgegen-
stande, Kiel, 1892, p. 49.
<pb n="364"/>The strenuous soldier turned aside to the son of
destruction,
And he came to the crafty one,' and asked him
in love for what reason he had called him.
That man answered him falsely," "That I might be
blessed [by thee]
Did I send that thou shouldst come to me, and
that I might see thy face."
255 "I have confidence in that God Whom I serve,"
The holy man with righteous mouth made answer
to the wicked one,
"If, according to this thy word, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="184"/> thou hast
called me to be blessed³ [by me],
May our Lord draw off the veil of darkness from
thy understanding,
May He make the light of His belief to shine in
thy mind,
260 That thou mayest confess Him and know Him [to be]
God [and] Man, in one Sonship.".
He took from his quiver a poisoned and fire-scat-
tering arrow,
And he added to it that which was meet from that
of Zadhôi*,
He placed it in the bow, and directed its aim to-
wards the pillar,
He stretched the string and shot the arrow, and it
smote him and passed on.
265 [Saying], "If, O servant of devils, thou hast called
me to disgrace and mock me,
->
* All the MSS. have but read -5 — Shobos
astutus, callidus.
*
"lyingly".
4 See supra, p. 362, 1. 235.
.ܠܡܬܞܬܟ Read 3
<pb n="365"/>
May the Lord smite this thy tower with hailstones,
And mayest thou fall among the stones thereof into
an evil death,.
May fire go forth from within the hail and devour
thy bones,
Mayest thou be a mocking and a byword to all
generations.
270 And all those who pass by the way shall make a
mock of thee for ever!"
At the words of the mighty old man, which were
filled with death,
A cloud of darkness filled with hail, and [having]
fire inside it,
Suddenly surrounded the whole tower like a garment,
To take vengeance upon the despicable scoffer who
had acted insolently.
275 And the coming down of the [hail-] stones upon the
pillar was [a sight] to see!
[They were] like the [hail-] stones which the Lord
brought down by Joshua the son of Nun."
Every man stood at a distance looking at that
which was done,
And fear and wonder filled the hearts of the multi-
tudes that were with him.
The wretched man was beaten to pieces, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="185"/>
and fire went forth and consumed his body,
280 And the old man avenged our father Mår Nestorius.
The despicable offspring of bats, the lover of
darkness,
Threatened to make war, forsooth, with an eagle
of mighty wings.
1 Joshua x. 11.
<pb n="366"/>His claw smote him on the head, and ripped him
open, and cast him into the darkness of his nest,
The stone crushed him, the fire devoured him, and
he remained for perdition.
285 He became a reproach for the wayfarers, and a
proverb for generations,
According to what the sanctified mouth of our
pious father said.
The head of the Holy Church was exalted by reason
of that which was wrought,
And the heretics, the followers of Severus' were
made a mockery.
The report flew like a bird into all countries,
290 And the hidden power which is in holy men was
glorified.
295
And to George, by the spirit of revelation, he
prophesied, [saying],
"Our Lord Jesus will exalt thee to be the head of
all His Church",
And also to this man was this thing wrought in a
sublime' manner,
And he was appointed Catholicus and Patriarch of
the Church.
He went forth from these [villages], being led
by the hand of the angel,
To the village of Heṭrê which is situated at the
ends of the earth.
And the arrow which was left he threw and cast
at it, and it remained a ruin,
I. e., the Jacobites.
.ܡܪܡܪܡܝܼܬ 3
.ܐܬܢܒܝ ܠܗ Read 2
<pb n="367"/>
Its inhabitants forsook it, and they were scattered
about to all countries.
The Lord made to disappear and scattered from
village to village
300 Those who went forth, like brands from the fire.
Their mighty villages he left in ruin, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="186"/>
And the stones of their buildings he piled up in
heaps like hills.
The strenuous soldier passed on and came to his
throne,
His garments were red with the blood of men like
a treader of grapes,'
305 Like a treader of grapes in the winepress had he
trodden their bodies,
And he had pierced them with sharp arrows and
had destroyed them.
May our Lord Jesus have mercy upon them through
his prayers,
And may He hold to be sufficient for them the
judgment with which they were judged in
this world.
His Nod beareth all sinners graciously,
310 And by means of them He spreadeth out His
righteousness without sparing.
His dispensation is hidden from us, namely, why
He made an end of the good and evil together.
A mighty famine took place in the days of the
good shepherd,
Want, in which there was no solace, spread over
every thing.
315 Starving men and languishing beggars and orphans
increased,
Isaiah lxiii. 1-3.
<pb n="368"/>The blessed man saw their afflictions and was pained
and was grieved.
He went to the city of the Athôrâyê' on their
behalf,
To collect from them a sack full of alms and obla-
tions for them.
Every man gave to him with a full and ever flowing
hand,
320 For they held him to be like unto a prophet and
an Apostle.
325
The things which he wrought shone brightly in
their sight,
For he was established as a mighty man in their
opinion.
He took the money which <pb type="textAllignment"  n="187"/> had been given
to him with diligent zeal,
And he went forth from thence like Abraham from
Egypt.³
There met him on the way six wicked men who
were thieves,
And they dared to plunder him, and likewise to
take the money which he had with him.
* In Bk. iii. chap. 9, supra, p. 337, it is said that Mâran-
'ammeh went to the "Hebrew Fortress"
to beg for
money; from this passage and line 317 above it is clear that
he went to Môșul or to some part of it. Compare “Mosul....
von vielen angesehenen Juden bewohnt, deren Synagogen eher
Palästen als Gebethäusern glichen;" Albrecht, Die in Taḥkemôni
vorkommenden Angaben über Harizi's Leben, Göttingen, 1890,
p. 35.
bag, sack; compare Talmudic N☐☐ (Buxtorf cd.
Fisher p. 386, col. 1), and or saccus, pera, Payne
Smith, Thes., col. 1408.
3 Genesis xiii. 1.
<pb n="369"/>
He took his rod, and tied his turban cloth upon the
top of it, and threw it up into the air.
And what had been done was bitter, and painful
and grievous to him.
He cried out with mournful sighs to our Redeemer
concerning his injury,
330 And he called his days a life full of every affliction.
"Behold from the time that I came into the world
I have lived an evil life,
And a little rest hath never appeared to me in the
habitation of time".
His rod stood [in the air], and that spiritual being
who accompanied him,
Surrounded it on all sides with arrows of fire.
335 He emitted and shot out sparks from the fringes³
of the turban cloth,
And they came down and lighted upon the faces
of those evil men.
They were overcome and brought low by the fiery
darts of the burning,
They sought to escape and were no longer wishful
to do harm to his holiness:
"Restrain from thy servants, O blessed old man,
the sparks of fire,
340 Let us depart as we have come in this matter.
Famine compelled us and through necessity have
we done this thing,
Spare our lives which are come to an end and are
extinguished by the suffering of hunger".
" Or "tassels"; see supra, p. 339.
2 See Brit. Mus. MSS. Orient. 2441, fol. 365 b, col. 2, and
Rich 2703, fol. 174b, col. 1.
ܫܒܝܒܝ ܢܘܪܐ ܒܨܚܝܐ ܥܬܝܩܐ ܠܦܪ̈ܚܪܘܚܬܐ
فذة poo حذ هذهعم الشرارات النار شرار النار
aaa
<pb n="370"/>The holy man took a handful of his blessings
(alms),
And made the men participators in his provisions,
and went on his way,
545 <pb type="textAllignment"  n="188"/> The blessed man being by what he had
done like unto
The mercy of the God of the universe in respect
of our wickednesses.
He distributed the silver and gold which he had
brought to the mouths of the starving,
And he wisely fed the orphans and the needy.
And while the glorious priest was excelling in
such things,
350 He was advancing in years, and becoming old
and grey.
He drew near, and had already come to the end
of his days
And the end of his course began to appear, and
the conclusion of his life.
Sickness came upon him, and the powers of his
body began to be enfeebled,
And little by little his body melted away, and came
to an end, and perished.
355 His ship came to rest in the harbour of peace
away from storms,
And his rich cargo went forth uninjured from among
the waves.
He forsook the dwelling of mortality, reserved for
corruption,
And in the pure path of all the righteous he ended
his journey.
His soul departed in the hands of the Watchers,
borne with great honour,
<pb n="371"/>
360 And with the songs and hymns of praise of the
spiritual beings,
His pious soul entered into Paradise,* and rested.
And the triumph of its labours and their rewards
are preserved in silence,
Until the day in which our Lord shall be revealed
in great glory,
And it shall return and put on glory in its temple.*
365 The multitudes and all ranks [of people] bore with
honour his venerable body,
With hymns and songs of praise of the Holy Spirit.
They laid him in the temple <pb type="textAllignment"  n="189"/> to the right
of the holy altar,³
I. e., the earthly Paradise. "As to where the souls abide
from the time they leave their bodies until the resurrection,
some say that they are taken up to heaven, that is, to the
region of the spirit where the celestial hosts dwell. Others say
that they go to Paradise, that is, to the place which is abund-
antly supplied with the good things of the mystery of the
revelation of God; and that the souls of sinners lie in darkness
in the abyss of Eden outside Paradise. (Compare Animas
Sanctorum, statim atque corporibus solvuntur, in Paradisum
terrestrem deferri; Damnatorum verò Animas in inferiori loco
apud eundem Paradisum collocari; B. O., iii. 11, p. 342, No. 4)
Others say that they are buried with their bodies; that is to
say, as the two were buried in God at baptism, so also will
they now dwell in Him until the day of the resurrection. Others
say that they stand at the mouth of the graves and await their
Redeemer; that is to say, they possess the knowledge of the
resurrection of their bodies." Book of the Bee, ed. Budge,
p. 132. See also Badger, Nestorians, vol. ii. p. 419.
2 I. e., the temple of the flesh.
3 The whole choir, as well as the sacred table, is often
called Thomas of Margâ wishes to say that just as the
body of Mâran-'ammeh was laid on the right hand side of the
<pb n="372"/>A mystery [is] that position which is prepared for
him in heaven above.
May our Lord guard our feebleness by his prayers,
370 And surround with the wall of Thy care the sheep
of Thy flocks.
At his entreaty rain down Thy showers upon our
fields,"
And drive away from them granary worms, and
locusts, and hail, and the scorching wind.
May our crop become [increased] an hundredfold,
like that of Isaac,"
That the offering of the humble as well as of the
great man may come to Thy home.
375 Bless, our Lord, the herds of our cattle, and the
flocks of our sheep,
That orphans and the needy may be clothed from
them like those of Job.³
Prosper and bless the rich like Jacob; *
That the needy may feed at their table [as at that of]
Abraham.³
Enrich the poor with riches sufficient for sustaining
their lives,
380 That by reason of their abundance they may con-
fess Thy goodness at all times.
Support the old men with the strength of Thy
power, and make them young men,
That they may teach early manhood chastity of life.
,(6 .1 ,171 .text. p( ܞܟܠܐ ܥܡ ܩܣܛܪܘܡܐ. ܕܩܢ̈ܟܐ ܒܓܒܐ ܕܝܡܝܢܐ ,choir
so he will one day stand at the right hand of the presence
of God.
* The text of BC is corrupt; read
2 Genesis xxvi. 12.
Genesis xxx. 43.
"our furrows."
3 Job xxix. 12.
5 Genesis xviii. 5.
<pb n="373"/>
Bless all young people, nourish the children, and
cherish the ailing,
Satisfy the hungry, and feed the orphans that they
may praise Thee.
385 Fill the garment of the widow with Thy food,
That she may not be left without the means of
sustaining her life.
Magnify and honour the reverend priests who
4 minister in Thy holy things,
And clothe with glory the deacons who bear Thy
altar."
Preserve, O our Lord, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="190"/> this our monastery
from the spoilers,
390 And establish every thing belonging to it in Thy
mercy and by Thy grace.
Hide our lives from all our affliction in the shadow
of Thy wings,
And put away from us every sickness and every
injury.
Drive away from Thy servants the evil oppression
of those who hate us,
And may Thy compassion abound towards us at
every moment to preserve our lives.
395 May faith spring up within us like a root,
And true righteousness like the fruit thereof.
Sustain our feebleness at every moment to stand
before Thee,
As it is meet for good servants who love their
lord.
May this church, in which is placed the body of
the righteous man Thy servant,
1 Cf. Numbers chaps iii. iv; Joshua iii. 17.
<pb n="374"/>400 Pour out the truth of the doctrine of life for ever.
Protect our Father the Metropolitan, and increase
by his hands
The flocks of Thy sheep and of Thy pasture like
unto Paul."
Bless the priests and the Levites who are round
about him,
And according to Thy pleasure may they increase
the talents' which they have taken from Thee.
405 [Bless] believing men and women also, and all ranks
[of people]
Who go in before Thee to pray in this temple.
Make them worthy, that in the church which is in
Heaven above,
They may praise Thy name together with the hosts
of the righteous who have been made perfect.
Also upon the hands and mouth which wrote down
the triumph of Thy servant
410 Let Thy tribunal shew compassion, according to the
wont of Thy graciousness.
And him that was, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="191"/> by his entreaty, the
cause of our history,
Protect in this world, and in the next make worthy
of the festal chamber³ of Thy light.
Pardon the offences of all the children of the Holy
Church,
Acts xv. 41.
The reference here appears to be to the service for the
ܘܡܒܪܟ ܐܪܟܝܕܝܩܘܢ ܠܡܬܬܣܝܦܢܐ ܥܠ ܒܘܪܟܝܗܘܢ ;Ordination of Deacons
,See B. O., ii. II. p. 8o6 .ܕܝܡܝܢܐ ܘܗܝ ܕܣܡܠܐ ܙܩܝܦܐ ܕܚܕܐ ܟܟܪܐ ܩܕܠܘ
II. 19-22; and St. Matthew xxv. 15.
.ܘܒܐ s forܟܘܒܐ like ,ܓܢܘܢ for ܓܢܘܢ ܢ
<pb n="375"/>
415
And let those who are written down by Thee,
live through Thee, according to Thy will.
From the mouth of us all, may there be praise to
Thee, and to Thy Father glory,
And to the Holy Spirit exaltation, for ever and
ever, Amen.
By the help of our Lord [here] endeth the discourse
which was composed and written by the command
of the wise and learned nobleman Mâr Ḥasân,
the son of Sabhr-Îsho, the teacher of truth,
upon the holy and blessed Mar Maran-
'ammeh, the Metropolitan Bishop.
[Here] endeth the Third Book.

<pb n="376">
BOOK IV.
CHAPTER I.
THE INTRODUCTION TO THE BOOK.
Now as among the ancient people the priest, in that
law which foreshadowed these things which we now
have, seasoned the offerings of the Lord with salt
which could be perceived by the senses, even as it
is said, "Upon all thy offerings thou shalt sprinkle salt,
and thou shalt not neglect the salt of the covenant of
the Lord thy God", so also let us come and season
these things which we have with the salt which can
be perceived by the mind, and let us join to our
histories, in every place where it is necessary, the
words of the Holy Scriptures. And as the offerings
of old received an additional sweetness from the salt,
so also will these our histories acquire an additional
flavour through the salt of the words from the writings
of the Spirit. And first of all let the blessed Evagrius
cast his contribution with us into this discourse which
we are about to write upon his fellow-workers, and
let us hearken unto his counsel and take heed unto
his command, for he speaketh unto us, saying, "Look
ܡܬܝܕܥܢܝܐ the opposite of ,ܡܬܕܓܫܢܝܐ -
Leviticus ii. 13.
<pb n="377"/>
into thine own self, lest for the sake of profit, or
transient glory, or that it may be well with thee, thou
darest to speak about that which is not seemly, and
art cast forth from divine circles (assemblies), like that
man who sold young doves' in the Temple". It is
necessary then, that above all things we should cleave
to the truth, and that we should carefully preserve the
order of truth, so that we may not err from what is
seemly, but that we may write <pb type="textAllignment"  n="193"/> and may make
manifest those things which stir up in the hearts of
the prudent glory to God, Who in the early, middle and
latter [generations] shewed forth and still sheweth forth
His power, and Who honoured and held to be worthy of
the same reward of one dînâr those who had laboured
in the vineyard of His commandments the whole day,
and those who had laboured for some hours, and those
who had laboured for one hour [only].*
CHAPTER II.
OF THE BLESSED RABBAN ÎSHO-YAHBH, THE HEAD OF THE
MONASTERY, WHENCE HE CAME, OF WHAT PARENTS HE
WAS BORN, AND OF HOW HE WAS BROUGHT UP.
In the three books which precede this, which is the
fourth, the matter³ of our discourse hath undertaken
to relate the histories of holy men, some of which
have been written down by skilled writers, and some
of which have not been put on record.* Of those
histories which exist in writing we have written such
St. Matthew xxi. 12.
32
2 St. Matthew xx. 1-16.
* Read.
bbb
<pb n="378"/>things as [their writers] omitted, and which we either
found in the histories of others, or which were handed
down' to us by hearsay; but those histories which do
not exist in writing, and which are inscribed neither
in works specially devoted to them, nor in other places,
I have learned from the very old men who were to
be found in this monastery, and according as Christ
our Lord hath aided me I have made them to possess
consecutive order, and have laid them before thee [O
'Abd-isho]. And behold now, by the help of our Lord
and by thy prayers, I will proceed with my rehearsing
of them, and with my feeble ability will relate the
histories of these holy men who a short time ago served
our Lord in this holy monastery, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="194"/> and all the
things concerning them which were luminously pointed
out to me by the holy men who lived in their days,
and who became also their disciples. At the beginning
of their histories we will place the account of the
triumphs of the holy Rabban İsho-yahbh. Now this
Isho-yahbh of holy memory was by race from this
country of Margâ; he sprang from an honourable and
noble family, and was a kinsman of the Patriarch Åshö-
yahbh the Great.3 The village in which he was born
and brought up was Tellà, a village in the province
of Birtâ, and he became a disciple in this monastery
from his youth at the hands of the Metropolitan Bish-
.ܐܬܝܒܠ Read 1
* All the MSS. have but we should have expected.
37. ., sho-yahbh of Adiabene. See supra, p. 131ff.
* Tellâ Bîrtâ was situated in the diocese of Marga, beyond the
river Zâb, reckoning from Arbela; see Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 227.
5 To be distinguished from Bîrtâ in Saphsâphâ; see Hoff-
mann, Auszüge, p. 227.
<pb n="379"/>
op Mâr John, when he was head of the monastery.³
And when the holy Mâr Aḥâ, the head of the mon-
astery, was consecrated Metropolitan after Mâr John,
this holy man was elected head of this monastery; and
when the Bishop of Nineveh, Mâr Abraham, of blessed
life, died, the people of Nineveh begged and entreated
that he might be their bishop, and the blessed Mår
Aḥâ ordained Mâr Isho-yahbh bishop, and sent him
to Nineveh; and he performed the episcopal office until
he was crowned with old age. And when the pious
Hěnân-isho, this other Catholicus, died, and a synod
was assembled to appoint a Catholicus, the election to
the patriarchate was ordered and prepared for the bless-
ed Mâr Isho-yahbh by all the Bishops and Metropolitans
and heads of believers so that he became the Patriarch.*
See supra, p. 234ff. 2 See Bk. iii. chap. 4, supra, p. 248ff.
3 7. e., Hěnân-Isho' II., who succeeded Mâr Jacob as Nes-
torian Patriarch A. Gr., 1085-A. D., 774-A. H. 157; he
died A. D. 780. For his writings see B. O., iii. 1, pp. 155,
157. For the famous Chinese-Syriac monument of Singan-fu,*
which was inscribed during the reign of this Patriarch, see
B. O., . 11, p. 538 ff.; Yule, The Book of Ser Marco Polo,
vol. ii. p. 13ff.; Bar-Hebraeus, Chron. Eccles., ii. p. 166, note 1;
B. O., . 1, p. 156. Copies of this interesting document have.
been published by Kircher, China Monumentis, Amsterdam, 1667;
Pauthier, L'inscription Syro-Chinoise de Si-ngan-fou, Paris 1858;
Yule, Ser Marco Polo, vol. ii. facing p. 16 (from a rubbing by
Dr. Lockhart); and a new edition of these texts was promised by
Heller, Prolegomena zu einer neuen Ausgabe der Nestorianischen
Inschriften von Singan-fu (in Verhandlungen des VII Orient.
Congresses in Wien, 1886).
4 The last five lines of the text of this chapter and the first
eight lines of the next are quoted in B. O., iii. I, p. 158, note 2.
* The capital of Shensi, originally called Changgan. It was the metro-
polis of Shi-Hoangti of the Thsin dynasty.
<pb n="380"/><pb type="textAllignment"  n="195"/>
CHAPTER III.:
OF MAR TIMOTHY, BISHOP OF BETH BEGHASH, AND OF THE
PROPHECY WHICH WAS MADE CONCERNING HIM BY
ONE OF THE OLD MEN [IN THE MONASTERY].
Now there was in this monastery a certain solitary,
who was an exceedingly old man, with whose name
I am unacquainted. Now Timothy had an uncle whose
Iname was George, who was Bishop of the country
of Beth Beghash,' and he sent the boy Timothy' from
him to Rabban Mâr Abraham³ the Expositor, when he
was in Bashosh, a village of Saphsâpha, and the boy
made his passage [thither by way of] this monastery.
And when that holy old man came to this community,
and saw the youth who was standing up, it was re-
vealed to him that he was to be exalted above all who
were there by Christ our Lord, and he knew that
he was to be a chief in the Church of God. And
when [the service in] the church was ended," he took
him with him to his cell, and made him sit down, and
asked him, saying, "Whence comest thou, my son, and
whither goest thou?" And the youth said to him, “I am
a nephew of George, Bishop of Beth Beghâsh, and he has
* See supra, p. 236.
See B. O., iii. 1, pp. 196, 197, note 2.
3 I. e., Abraham bar-Lîphê who flourished about A. D. 750.
He wrote an "Exposition of the Offices", for which
reason he is called the "Expositor". He held the belief that
souls are sentient things after they have left their bodies, and
that after the general resurrection their memory of the Trinity
would be blotted out. See B. O., iii. I, pp. 528, 530.
* See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 223.
5 Literally, "when the church was dismissed."
<pb n="381"/>
sent me that I might go to school to Rabban Abra-
ham, in the village of Båshôsh”. Now at that time,
according to what is said, a geribha' of wheat was
sold for one zûzâ, and [the old man] took out one zûzâ
and gave him, and admonished him, saying, “Go now
and buy wheat, and eat, and work fully in the study
of the Scriptures, and guard thyself from all ignoble
things, for thou shalt become Patriarch of all the
country of the East. And behold, our Lord will
make thee triumphant so that like unto thee no one
hath ever been, and before and after thee no one shall
ever be. Forty <pb type="textAllignment"  n="196"/> and two years shalt thou stand
at the head of all the pastures of Christ, and when by
the hand of God thou hast been exalted to these things,
let thy heart be disposed to honour this holy house,
in which it was [made] known to thee that thou wert
.neither of no account nor despised before God; go
now in peace, and keep those things which I have
commanded thee". And when the youth had been
sufficiently trained and had returned to his uncle,―now
George was using every means he could to adjudge
his throne to his brother's son-[Divine] grace, I say,
wrought that which was beyond his intention, and he ex-
cused himself to Már Máran-ammeh the Metropolitan on
the ground of his old age, and resigned the priesthood.
And the young man Timothy was appointed Bishop
of the country of Bêth Beghâsh.
.., the thirtieth part of a boo; see Payne
Smith, Thes., coll. 780, 1713; and compare Armen. gṛiü, σátov
in Lagarde, Armenische Studien, p. 39, no. 536 (Abhandlungen
König. Gesell. Wissen. zu Göttingen, Histor. - Philolog. Classe
Bd. XXII. No. 4).
<pb n="382"/>CHAPTER IV.
OF HOW TIMOTHY OBTAINED POSSESSION OF THE PATRIARCHATE
BY FRAUD, LIKE JACOB WHO OBTAINED BY FRAUD THE
BLESSINGS OF ISAAC HIS FATHER.*
There are times when matters concerning heaven
and things above [this] world require human means
and help, and we may learn and prove from many in-
stances that such means and help are allowed by the
Will of God, even though they progress by cunning.³
When God the Lord of all made the blessed Isaac to
bless his sons, He moved him with the desire for
food of the chase in the desert, to such a degree that
when Esau was away, there should be the opportunity
for Jacob to carry away the blessing. And if it were
not so would not that great and rich man have said
to his son, "My son, slay me a kid of the goats, that I
may eat, and that my soul may bless thee before
I die"? <pb type="textAllignment"  n="197"/> but no, he sent him off upon the trouble-
some labour of hunting after fleeing and inaccessible
prey. Thus also was it when Samuel was commanded
by the Lord to anoint David, and he feared the sword
of Saul, he was commanded to take a heifer and to
say, "I am come to sacrifice to the Lord"." Thus also
I was it when the blessed Paul received a revelation
from God that not one of them should perish, but only
the ship, and he said beforehand to all those who
were with him, "Eat bread, and be not distressed, for
our Lord hath revealed it to me that no soul of us
3 a "fraudulently."
ܨܢܝܥܐܝܼܬ 3
5 I Samuel xvi. 2.
2 Genesis xxvii. 27-30.
4 Genesis xxvii. 3, 4.
<pb n="383"/>
shall perish, but only the ship"; and [when] he knew
that the sailors were making ready to flee, he said to
the Romans who were with him, "If these flee we
shall all perish." And [there are] many [other] instances
which it is not necessary for us to collect.
And in this case also, since the Patriarchate was
set apart for Timothy, truth acted with subtlety and
performed its work. And when Timothy saw the face
of every man fixed upon our Mår Isho-yahbh, he ad-
vised him secretly when they were alone together,
and said to him, "Thou art an old man, and thou
art notable to stand up and meet the attacks of the
envious, Ephraim of Elam, Joseph the son of Marî, and
other opponents; but do thou excuse thyself, and be-
come one of my supporters, and I will make thee
Metropolitan of Adiabene"; and to speak briefly, Timo-
thy was appointed Catholicus and Patriarch, and was
proclaimed among the heads of the fathers. And after
a few days, because the holy Mâr Mâran-'ammeh,
Metropolitan of Arbela, was dead, he appointed and
proclaimed Mår Åsho'-yahbh Bishop of the church of
Adiabene, and Metropolitan of all his countries.³
* Acts xxvii. 21-44
* The text of the concluding portion of this chapter is quoted
in B. O., iii. 1, p. 158, col. 2.
3 Timothy L was a native of Ḥazzâ in Adiabene, and a
pupil of Abraham bar-Dâshandâdh at the school of Bashosh in
Saphsâphâ; he became Patriarch about A. D. 780 and died A.
H., 204, or 205-A. D. 819-820, or 820-821.
The story
of Timothy's accession is thus told by Bar-Hebraeus (Chron.
Eccles., . col. 165 f.):-After Ḥenân-Isho' II. arose Timothy,
<pb n="384"/>CHAPTER V.:
OF ROSTÂM BISHOP OF ḤENÂITHA.
Now when the Shahrighân of Kĕphar ‘Uzzêl, and
the inhabitants of the province of Bêth Âro'ê saw that
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. I, p. 207.
Bishop of Bâghash, a diocese in the mountains of Arbela. Now
when Ḥenân-Isho' was dead a schism fell among the Bishops
and the people. Some of them wished Ephraim, Metropolitan
of Gundê-Shàbhôr to be Patriarch, some wished for Thomas,
Bishop of Kashkar, and some for this Timothy. Then Timothy
acted craftily, and having filled bags (50) with copper money
(4), he sealed them, and took them with him. And he
called the scholastics (0) to him secretly by night,
and said to them, "I have collected all this money, dînârs and
dirhams, and I wish to spend it upon [your] school; help me
then, and ye shall find good [for yourselves]". And they being
led astray believed his words, and went forth and fought against
all those who were opposed to [the election of] Timothy. And
they brought the Bishops by force, and took Timothy and car-
ried him to Seleucia and proclaimed him Patriarch. Meanwhile
Thomas, Metropolitan of Kashkar, gathered together thirteen
bishops, and they came to Bagdad and tarried in the Mon-
astery of Mår Pethiôn, and they deposed Timothy on the third
Sunday of the forty days' fast; and Timothy gathered together
other [bishops] and excommunicated Thomas. Thomas and his
bishops then elected the monk George, but this rival died sud-
denly, and Timothy having succeeded in deceiving Bêrôë the
nd the heads of colleges (asبيرو الاركد ياقون, archdeacon
stated above), by promising them large sums of money he caus-
ed himself to be elected Patriarch. Subsequently Ephraim of
Gundê-Shâbhôr, Solomon of al-Hadithah, Joseph of Merv, and
Sergius of Ma'allthâ held a synod at the Monastery of Beth
Hâlê, in which they made Rôstàm, Bishop of Henâithâ, Metro-
politan of Adiabene in place of Îsho'-yahbh, and excommunicated
Timothy, who, in return excommunicated Joseph of Merv. Joseph
<pb n="385"/>
US
a Metropolitan Bishop who had not been elected by
them had been appointed over them, and that the
Catholicus had considered them as if they did not exist,
they decreed with oaths, saying, "We will never be
obedient to Isho-yahbh who hath been set over
without being elected by us". And they went down
to Ḥědhatta' to Mâr Solomon,' bishop of that place,
and there happened to be there also Joseph³ the son
of Mari, the wicked Metropolitan of Merv, who had
come thither because the holy Mâr Solomon, on account
of his old age, was not able to go down to the synod.
And Joseph the son of Marî thought' that he (2. e.,
Solomon) would stir up a commotion against Timothy
when he should speak to Solomon, saying, “Behold,
I. e., al-Hadithah; see Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 178.
2 He flourished about A. D. 760-780. He wrote certain
histories and a treatise upon the monastic life.
Wabup Lubol Jr. See B. O., iii. 1, p. 210.
3 See B. O., i. 1, pp. 159, 208.
4 Read o.
laid the matter before the Khalif of Bagdad, al-Mahdî, but ob-
taining no support from him, he turned Muhammedan, and is
said by Bar-Hebraeus (Chron. Eccles., ii. col. 171) to have been
publicly convicted of sodomy. Timothy was excommunicated
a second time by Ephraim of Gundê-Shâbhôr, and retorted by
a counter-excommunication. On the whole subject see Wright,
Syriac Literature, p. 845; Bar-Hebraeus, Chron. Eccles., ii.
coll. 165-169; B. O., ii. pp. 433, 434; iii. 1. 158-163. Ac-
cording to 'Abhd-Îsho', Timothy wrote the "Book of the Stars";
a "Disputation with al-Mahdi"; a work on "Ecclesiastical Judg-
ments"; "Synodical Volumes", a two hundred
"Letters" arranged in two volumes; a volume of "Questions"; a
volume on "Chapters"; and a "history." See B. O., iii. 1.
pp. 162, 163.
ссс
<pb n="386"/>Ephraim of Elam wisheth also to gather together¹
the Bishops and Metropolitans who are not of the
laying on of hands of Timothy, that he may cause Tim-
othy to be deposed";" and when to this wish that of the
Shahrighân was added Joseph found the material for
his wickedness. And he led astray the holy Mar
Solomon, as Şaibâ [Ziba] led David astray, ³ and as the
lying prophet [deceived] the prophet of God who came
from Judah to Bethel.+ And they took Rosțâm, Bishop of
Ḥenâithâ, and appointed him Metropolitan of Arbela in
the Mud Convent, which is on the Tigris, below the
Ḥesnâ 'Ebhrâyâ³ in Nineveh, and the Shahrighân took
him and seated him on the Metropolitan throne of Bêth
Mâr Kardagh. And he seized the Bishop's throne
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="199"/> and all his income,' and the wretched man
B. O., iii. 1, p. 207, col. 2, 1. II, reads
—кáðapoi. According to Brit. Mus. MS.
Orient 2441, fol. 3516, col. 2, the word means
Do? báze.
32 Samuel, chap. xvi. 3, 4; xix. 29. 4 1 Kings xiii. 18.
5. e., the "Hebrew Fortress"; see Bk. iii. chap. 9, supra,
p. 337.
6 pas in Turkish means "Black Mountain". Mar Ķardâgh
was of noble birth, and is said to have been a descendant of
Nimrod on his father's side, and of Sennacherib on his mother's;
he was endowed with great physical beauty, and fine mental
qualities, but he was originally a heathen. He was martyred
in the forty-ninth year of the reign of Sapor II. i. e., A. D. 358.
For the life, history and acts of Mâr Kardagh see Feige, Die
Geschichte des Mâr Abhdishô und seines Füngers Mâr Qardagh,
Kiel, 1889; Abbeloos, Acta Mar Kardaghi Assyriae Praefecti
qui sub Sapore II martyr occubuit, Bruxelles, 1890; Bedjan, Acta
Martyrum et Sanctorum, tom. ii. pp. 442-506, Paris, 1891.
ܥܠܠܬܗ Read 1
<pb n="387"/>
began to eat and to make merry, not knowing that his
stroke was at hand, and that there was none to de-
liver him.
CHAPTER VI.:
OF THE GOING UP OF OUR HOLY MÂR ÎSHO-YAHBH TO
ADIABENE.
And when Mår Isho-yahbh had arrived at the village
of Haighâlâ, and at Estrenîyâ,³ and had heard and
learned also concerning the things which had taken
place in the matter of Rôsțâm, he wrote to Mâr Timo-
thy, saying, "This is thy love for thy friend! Thou
hast deceived me, and hast made a laughing-stock of
me. Thou hast brought me out from the throne of
Nineveh upon which I sat, and I am deprived even of
this throne which thou hast been pleased to give me;+
take then this priesthood which thou hast given to me,
and I will go to my own monastery and will end my
life [there]". And Mâr Timothy wrote to him, "Faint
not, neither be disturbed by these two tails of burning
brands who have appointed a Metropolitan' without
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. I, p. 207, col. 2.
I. e., ale on the Tigris. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 238.
3 With the form compare text p. 183, 1. 5.
The termination ya may be either the Arabic ✓✓ or Persian
ya; see Nöldeke, Zur Orientalischen Geographie, Z. D. M. G.
Bd. XXVIII. 94 n. 1.
.ܕܬܬܠ ܠܝ ܐܬܚܠܨܬ or ,ܕܬܬܠ ܠܝ ܗܐ ܐܬܚܠܨܬ Read either 4
5 Isaiah vii. 4.
6 The Metropolitan of Adiabene here referred to was Rôstâm,
concerning whom see the next chapter.
.
<pb n="388"/>the [consent of] the Patriarch; go to Adiabene, and
abide in every village which will receive thee," and the
village which desireth thee not, dispute not with it;
for the day of the destruction of the enemy is near,
and that which shall happen to them hasteneth," for
the Lord judgeth His people, and consoleth His serv-
ants". And when the blessed Mår Isho-yahbh had
read these things, he took courage and went up and
came to his country. And when, according to the
agreement which existed between them, neither the
Shahrighân nor the Aroâyê+ went out to meet him,
he went up to the Bânîkayê," and these people, and
those of all their province, and all the people of the
mountains of Adiabene, and the people of Ḥefthôn
received him with great joy, and with the honour of
which his holiness was worthy; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="200"/> and he passed
over to Margå, and he remained thus visiting these
believing people, and they rejoiced in him. And Rôsṭâm
and the nobles of Kephar 'Uzzêl lived luxuriously upon
all manner of dainty foods when he first' came from
his throne to them, and they enjoyed themselves with
riotous living while they threatened and made ready
to drive away the blessed Mâr Åsho-yahbh from the
part of the country which he held; but they did not
know that they would be put to shame through what
they were preparing and making ready.
* St. Matthew x. II.
.ܞܢܞܝ h forܢܞܝ 3
2 Deuteronomy xxxii. 35, 36.
* I. e., the people of Beth Aro'ê.
5 See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 238, note 1898.
6 Ḥepthôn, Ḥibtûn, the JлDл of Benjamin of Tudela, lay
upon the left side of the Upper or Great Zâb; for its history
see B. O., iii. ii. p. 737; and Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 233.
.ܡܩܕܡ Read 7
1
<pb n="389"/>
CHAPTER VII'
OF THE SWIFT JUDGMENT WHICH OVERTOOK ROSṬÂM, AND
OF HOW THOSE WHO HAD APPOINTED HIM WERE PUT TO
SHAME AND DISGRACED.
Now while the Spirit of God was longsuffering
towards Rosţâm, he hardened his heart and the wretch-
ed man never brought the matter into his mind or
thought, "How can I continue in the office of Metro-
politan since I have neither been appointed by the
Catholicus nor fully installed, or how can I dare to
remain in what I have"? But like Absalom," he wished
to act insolently towards the fatherhood of the Head
of the East, and according to the seed which Joseph
the son of Mari had sown in his ears, he awaited with
hope the disturbance [which was made] concerning the
Catholicus, even as Absalom waited eagerly for the counsel
of Ahithophel in [the matter of the destruction of
David. And while he was in the midst of these de-
liberations the Lord roused Himself like a sleeping man,
and smote <pb type="textAllignment"  n="201"/> His enemies behind Him, and He
chose Isho-yahbh His servant, and established him [to
be] the faithful steward over all His house.
And it came to pass one day when Rostam was
riding upon a large, richly caparisoned mule [which he
had chosen] in his pride, that as he was coming to his
* This chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1, p. 208, but the
ܠܫܓܘܫܝܐ ܕܥܠ ܩܬܘܠܝܩܐ. ܐܝܟ ܙܪܢܐ ܕܙܪ ܒܐܕܢܘܗܝ ܝܘܤܦ ܒܪ ܞܤܝ: ܐܝܟ words
(text, p. 200, 11. 15, 16) are omitted.
Assemânî has ; B. O., iii. I, p. 208, col. 2, 1, 24.
32 Samuel chaps xv.-xvii.
<pb n="390"/>house from his luxurious,* riotous and licentious orgies,"
he arrived near the habitation of Beth Mar Ķardâgh,
and the dogs of that place surrounded him until at
last he [was obliged] to dismount,³ and as soon as he
put his feet upon the ground they leaped upon him
in a body, and they worried him and bit him, and
brought him unto death, like that wicked woman Jezebel
(for
* Literally "a feast of cakes of his dainty foods"; 15ọ —
a drinking party, a banquet. According to Lagarde, Pûrîm, D',
25, Mandaïtic NWMD are derived from the Persian name
of a festival.
cakes, and in Jeremiah vii. 18, translates
the Hebrew D. The word is explained by the native lexico.
graphers to mean, "sacrifices offered to idols"; "sacrifices which
were offered to devils in the time of the heathen, and which
the Arabs still make in their festival;" and "cakes made of fine
flour, oil and honey." For the texts see Payne Smith, Thes.,
coll. 1163, 1164; Duval, Lexicon, col. 684. The reading of BC
Vat. is a mistake for the sing. of which si nausea,
is also explained by "the food which burneth in the stomach of
gluttons, and which maketh smoke in the throat;" see Payne
Smith, Thes., col. 354. The form indigestion, is given in
Duval, Lexicon, col. 269. Compare Armen. zoh "sacrifice"..
Lagarde, Armenische Studien, p. 55, No. 792 (Abhandlungen
König. Gesell. Wissen. zu Göttingen, Histor.-Philolog. Classe,
Bd. XXII. No. 4).
* Assemânî translates, "Accidit enim, ut Rostamus per eos
dies dum superbo sui fastus mulo vectus ab obscoeno secessu,
epulisque impudicitiam redolentibus exsaturatus," etc. (B. Q., iii. I,
p. 209, col. 1)
.ܪܟܘܒ for ܪܟܘܒ 3
* This danger to strange travellers riding through villages
in Mesopotamia is sometimes very great, for the dogs rush out
in a body, barking and howling, and often endeavour to bite
the horse's legs. Nothing but a good, long whip vigorously
applied will drive them away, and I have even known it neces-
sary to shoot one or more of them.
<pb n="391"/>
who persecuted the prophets.' And this was a mar-
vellous and fearful thing' to all those who heard it.
And Rosṭâm's boon companions were disgraced; and
their faces put to shame; and their counsels brought to
nought; and their fellowship and the bond of love
and their breathings of death against the righteous man
[Mar Isho-yahbh] which they had murmured over their
wine³ cups when brimming over with mixed wine were
dissolved. Then too the pious Mâr Solomon wrote
a letter of excuses and resigned [his] episcopal office,
and went and dwelt in the Monastery of Rabban Aaron
until the end of his life, and Joseph, the son of Mari
forsook Christianity and became a heathen. Thus was
fulfilled upon them that which the pious Mâr Timothy
spake, saying, "The day of their destruction is near
at hand, and that which shall happen to them hasteneth."
CHAPTER VIII.
OF THE REPENTANCE OF THE PEOPLE OF ADIABENE, AND OF
THE MOST HUMBLE ENTREATY WHICH THEY OFFERED TO MAR
ISHO YAHBH THAT HE WOULD OCCUPY HIS EPISCOPAL
THRONE.
Now if not every man is to be trusted to guard
the treasures.<pb type="textAllignment"  n="202"/> of an earthly kingdom, but only
I Kings xviii. 4; 2 Kings ix. 35, 36.
2 In the text p. 201, note 7, read "Vat.
".
.which Payne Smith thinks may come from a sing ܒܥܘܬܐ 3
or (Thesaurus, coll. 434, 509). Compare the Persian
, which, according to Richardson, is "a large deep jug, in
which wine is brought to table, and from thence filled into
smaller cups." See Lagarde, Gesammelte Abhandlungen, Leipzig,
1866, p. 211; Duval, Lexicon, col. 350.
<pb n="392"/>those of whom the kingdom hath learned by experience
for a long time that they are fit to have its riches
entrusted to their care, how much less in respect of
the treasures of the kingdom of heaven is not every
Iman worthy to be an intermediary of their glory, but
only that man who is stamped with the signs of the
members of the household, who hath shown forth all
the days of his life proofs of his strenuousness, who
hath drunk like water medicines which cannot be per-
ceived by the mind, who hath driven away all [signs
of] growing old, who hath expelled from himself all
crassness, who hath been in the hospital' and hath
learned all things which are needful for healing, who
hath been made perfect in all the art of the healing
of souls, and who hath become a friend of wise physici-
ans. And because also the Divine selection, observing
beforehand the excellent qualities of many, of its ad-
ministration maketh intermediaries of those who possess
such qualities, and setteth apart physicians for the sick-
ness of the world, in such wise that when they come.
to act as intermediaries with mankind they shall not
be found wanting, and shall not suffer, together with the
scattering of the collection of their good qualities, the
ruin and destruction of those who are under their hands.
Now this Rôsțâm, the evil liver, took refuge with
men, and forgot the word of the divine man David,
"It is better to trust in the Lord than to trust in man","
for "his spirit goeth forth, and he returneth to his
earth", etc. And when the Eye which governeth all
things saw beforehand all the defects which he had
aouse of ܒܝܬ ܟܒܝܗܐ — ܢܝܠܐܚܐ — Eevodoxeiov — ܪܒܣܢܕܘܟܝܢ *
-
-
the sick.
2 Psalm cxviii. 8.
3 Psalm cxlvi. 4.
<pb n="393"/>
already gathered to himself, and all those others' which
he was about to gather, He put him out of life in
silence by a punishment of the bites of dogs, and by
the bitings of his own tongue with which he had bitten
the bodies of the holy Mâr Isho-yahbh and Mâr Timo-
thy; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="203"/> here was he rewarded with the destruc-
tion of all his body, and thus he left this life and went
to Sheol. Now when the Shahrighân and the believers
saw what had taken place, they came to the pious Mâr
Isho-yahbh their Metropolitan, and they offered him
repentance, and asked him to rise up and to come with
them to his episcopal throne. And he said to them,
"I shall remain here until Mår Catholicus sendeth me
[his] command to go in, and then I shall go in." And
Mâr Timothy wrote to him an open letter," and thus .
they celebrated his entry with honour like the day of
Hosannas,³ and all the people of the country were sub-
ject to his fatherhood.
CHAPTER IX.
OF HOW THE HOLY METROPOLITAN MÂR ISHO-YAHBH WAS
MOVED TO PULL DOWN THE MUD TEMPLE WHICH THE HOLY
MÂR ISHO-YAHBH [THE CATHOLICUS] HAD BUILT, AND TO
BUILD ANOTHER OF LIME, AND OF HOW THE MONKS WHO
LIVED IN HIS DAYS COUNSELLED HIM NOT TO DO SO BECAUSE
OF THE DIFFICULTY OF THE UNDERTAKING.
We may see by those things which have happened
from old time, in every kind of different way, through
.ܘܠܐܚܪ̈ܢܐ for ܘܕܐܚܪܢܐ -
2 a patent; see Payne Smith, Thes., col. 3338.
3 I. e., Palm Sunday.
4 I. e., Îsho-yahbh III. of Adiabene; see supra, p. 131ff.
ddd
<pb n="394"/>the administration of God which is beyond scrutiny,
that these things which are easy for the might of the
wise Creator break out suddenly, beyond all expecta-
tion and human thought, and they make the minds of
the prudent to stand up in wonder, and they stir up
praise of the excellence of His dispensation on every
tongue and in every mind. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="204"/> And moreover, we
must write down some of these our matters concerning
· our own monastery that we may shew that it is easy
for His power to do every thing, and that when it
appeareth fit to him, He maketh use of the riches and
money of strangers as if they were His own, even as
He spake by the hand of Haggai the prophet, "The
gold is mine, and the silver is mine", and, "From
between the teeth, and from the depths of the sea He
turneth back, and bringeth forth, and saveth", as He
spake by the hand of David. And He compelleth
forcibly foreign nations who are remote from the know-
ledge of Him and His worship, to be servants of those
whom He pleaseth, and He maketh them to carry their
wealth and their glory and to place them in the hands
of those who are members of His household. For
when the coming forth of the people from Egypt by
the hand of Moses was ordained and predestined in
His everlasting knowledge, and the gold and the silver
which the construction of the Tabernacle in the wilder-
ness would require from them [was determined], He com-
manded the children of Israel, by the hand of Moses, to
borrow vessels of gold, and vessels of silver, and fine
raiment of all kinds from the Egyptians, and He gave
Israelites favour in the eyes of the Egyptians, and they
* Haggai ii. 8.
2 Psalm lxviii. 22.
the
<pb n="395"/>
spoiled them.
And again when king Solomon was
making ready to build a house to the Lord, he, so to
speak, moved every thing under heaven, and he made
the Tyrians, and the Sidonians, and Saba, and Ophir,
and Havilah, and the remote islands to be participators
with him in the building of the holy temple in Jeru-
salem. So also in the case of the temple which was
restored by Zerubbabel* after the return from the capti-
vity, when the children of Judah were prevented [in
their work] by the envious nations that were round
about them, and were in despair because they thought
that this return from the captivity was not that which
the prophets proclaimed, and also because of the in-
sufficiency [of money] for the expenses of its mighty
and glorious buildings, the Lord encouraged them by
the hand of the prophet and said, "Yet once, and I will
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="205"/> shake the heavens, and the earth, and the dry land;
and I will shake all nations, and I will fill this house
with glory, saith the Lord, the mighty One, and I
will shake the house of Magog"." And they went up,
being prepared, with great riches, and the Lord
destroyed them all, and the children of Judah inherited
their riches and built the house of the Lord, and had
money to spare.
And [several] such-like things which were in no wise
of less magnitude than these did the Lord work in
this place for His chosen servant Mâr Åsho-yahbh. For
Exodus xii. 35, 36.
Şaidnâyĉ. See Nöldeke, Kurzgefasste Syrische Gram-
matik, p. 75; Gesenius, Thesaurus, p. 1154, col. I, at the foot.
32 Chronicles, chaps. i. and ii.
+ Haggai ii. 4.
5 Haggai ii. 6, 7.
<pb n="396"/>when he meditated pulling down that temple which the
blessed Mår Isho-yahbh the Catholicus had built, and
which had become old through the lapse of time and
years, and his friends were advising him not to do this,
saying, "Thou wilt never be able to finish thy building";
and the men who were envious of him, and those who
took no pleasure in such divine matters, but were turn-
ing them back through human considerations, even as
[saith] the great and blessed Pachomius,' were hinder-
Pachomius was born in the nome of Esneh, (Egypt.
sen, Copt. CHH), about A. D. 292, and his parents were pagans;
he became a Christian at a little village called "ONECHT, (the
Xnvoẞóσxiov of the Greeks) which was situated on the right
or east bank of the Nile in the nome of Diospolis Parva.
He lived during the time of the persecution of Diocletian, and
at its ending he was about twenty years old. When the Persi-
ans threatened to make war against the Greeks (uipuuAIOC),
he was drawn as a recruit from his native village, and being
fed by Christians when they stopped at the town of Esneh,
he was greatly impressed by their charity. Next day he sailed
as far as Antinoë, and was met there by the news that the
Greeks had conquered the Persians, and that the recruits were
to be sent back to their homes. On his way back he came
to the "desert village of Shenesèt, which was burnt up by ex-
cessive heat" ortul ǹ еpншoc x8 NOCHт eчpoк2 riten
nagai ǹ nikatua, and there God appeared to him and told
him to take up his abode. Three years later he joined Abba
Palamôn (naaшOH), and became his disciple. Soon after
this his sister Mary came to Tabenna (TABеNNHCI, see Quatre-
mère, Mémoires Géographiques, tom. I. p. 281) to see him, but
he refused to see her, and learning that she was disposed to
lead a life of good works, he sent some of his brethren to
build a habitation for her at some distance from the monastery.
A number of pious women joined her, and she became the
founder of a rule of nuns. Some time later Pachomius went
<pb n="397"/>
ing him, saying, "We do not wish thee to pull down
the temple which the holy fathers have built. Thou
wilt begin to build another, and wilt never finish it, or
thou wilt leave it half built, and wilt go away", yet
Isho-yahbh prevailed over both sides by the firmness
of his hope in God, and he brought many workmen
and hewers of stone, and he went with them to the
mountain of Děbhar Ḥewton' and he shewed them
round about the river Zâbhâ (Záb) limestone which
they were to quarry. And he made rafts* and brought
to the north of Panopolis ("UIN, Aḥmîm) and built monasteries
at Smine, or Tesmine (see Champollion, L'Égypte sous les
Pharaons, tom. 1. p. 265), and at Phenoum, woru, near the
mountains of Esneh. Thus in founding monasteries, in con-
firming the brethren, in healing the sick, and in working miracles
Pachomius passed his life; and died about A. D. 351, aged
sixty years. The above facts are drawn from the Coptic life
of Pachomius published by Amélineau, entitled Histoire de .
Saint Pakhome et de ses Communautés, (in Annales du Musée
Guimet) Paris, 1889; and from Etude Historique sur Saint
Pachome (in Bulletin de l'Institut Egyptien de l'année 1886,
Cairo 1887) by the same author. For the Latin and Greek
lives of Pachomius see Acta Sanctorum, May 14; for an Arabic
life see B. O., iii. 1, p. 286; for his Regulae Monasticae see
Cave, Hist. Litt., ad ann. 340, vol. I. p. 208; Palladius, Hist.
Laus., cap. 38 (for the Ethiopic text see Dillmann, Chrestomathia
Aethiopica, pp. XII. No. 6, and pp. 57-69; and Wright,
Catalogue of the Ethiopic MSS. in the British Museum, p. 171;
and for the Syriac text see Wright, Catalogue of Syriac MSS.,
p. 1312); and for an account of the estimation in which he was
held see Tillemont, Mémoires, tom. vii. p. 56.
I. e., Děbhar Hephton (or seems to be the plain of
Harir); see also Abbeloos, Acta Mar Kardaghi, p. 51, 1. 4;
and Feige, Die Geschichte des Mar Abhdishô, p. 31 (translation).
(called by the Arabs to-day
2 The or, or
<pb n="398"/>the limestone for the buttress' of the monastery, and
it was brought from there to the monastery by donkeys
kalak, pronounced vulgarly tcheletch) is a raft made of skins of
sheep blown out and tied in rows to poles. The poles are
fastened together by other poles and ropes and thus à square
or oblong structure is made. Upon it are laid planks of wood,
and upon those 'is placed the merchandise to be carried. A
small raft to carry four or five passengers and a fair amount
of baggage requires about one hundred and fifty skins, and
measures about 15-20 feet; but in the large wheat and alabaster
carrying rafts several hundreds are required; such rafts are
from thirty to forty feet square, and will carry from twenty-
five to forty tons of wheat packed in sacks, each of which
weighs about two hundredweight. The kalak floats down the
stream, and is guided by very long oars, at the ends of which
are tied pieces of reeds to form blades. The kalakje, or rafts-
man, every now and then pours water upon the skins to pre-
vent the escape of the air inside, but it is often necessary to
untie the neck of each skin, and to blow air into it with his
mouth through a reed, which he carries for this purpose. When
a raft arrives at its destination the poles are untied, and sold
either for building purposes or firewood, and the skins are un-
tied, emptied of air, dried thoroughly, and having been tied in
bundles, are packed upon the backs of animals and sent up
the river to be used again. The speed of a raft depends upon
the current and upon the exertions of the raftsman. I made
the journey by raft from Môşul to Bagdad in February 1889
in a little over four days; but in December 1890 the journey
required nearly seven days, while the huge rafts about forty
feet square which I passed at the junction of the Lower Zâb
with the Tigris did not arrive for some days after I had land-
ed at Bagdad. Rafts which carry alabaster slabs for building
purposes or for burning into lime are much smaller than wheat
rafts, and the skins are often totally submerged. For other
descriptions of the raft see Buckingham, Travels, vol. ii. p. 87;
and Ker Porter, Travels, vol. ii. p. 259.
The word is new, and Hoffmann believes that it
<pb n="399"/>
and mules; and he burned the limestone and pounded
it into lime, and he collected stones for building and
stands for either "the tooth of a river bed," or
"the head of a river bed." It seems that Thomas of Margâ
Imeans that he brought blocks of limestone to build a pier in
the peak of the mountain upon which the monastery stood,
where two streams joined, to form a firm foundation for the
walls of the church. The rafts would bring the stone immedi
ately under the monastery, and mules and donkeys would bring
it up the hill.
In Moşul, and in Mesopotamia generally, burnt limestone
is pounded by means of a large square stone, about two feet
long by ten or twelve inches square, which having been pierced
longitudinally is fastened to two chains by means of an iron
rod running through it, and is drawn over the limestone by a
horse or mule. The pounded lime is placed in basket panniers,
two of which form a good load for a donkey, and in this way
it is carried a considerable distance. Within the last few
years the pious monks of the Monastery of Rabban Hormuzd
near Alkosh have rebuilt part of the monastery on the plain,
which travellers by the permission of the father superior use
as a khan, and the monks told me on November 30, 1890,
that every load of lime had to be brought thither from the
place some miles away where it was burnt and crushed. The
new portion of the building is very good and substantial, and
the lime church is a fine specimen of its kind. Any one who
has seen a mountain monastery in the East will understand the
difficulties which stand in the way of building a church or
monastery, and will readily perceive that the objection of the
monks of Beth 'Abhê to the pulling down of their church was
not unnatural. The lack of roads and means of transport, the
delays caused by the cold of winter and the heat of summer,
and the large sums of money required for a building like a
church would cause greater and wealthier men than the head
of a decaying monastery to pause before beginning such a
work.
<pb n="400"/>burned bricks. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="206"/> And having removed the altar
to the library of the monastery, and the bodies and
the coffins (or sarcophagi) of the holy men from the
martyrium, he began with great labour to pull down
the wide and massive old walls which his fathers had
built, and a heap of earth was thrown up, which filled
the whole space round about the temple. And when
the holy Isho-yahbh saw that, the temple having been
pulled down, the size of the [heap of] earth required
three times more space than the building itself, and
was crushed with grief on account of this, for he had
not taken [the matter of the mud] into consideration
in the estimate' which he made in his plan for the
whole [re]building, he made use of an artifice which
should benefit himself and others. On the day of the con-
gregation he said to the solitaries, "Ye know, O blessed
men, and also the tradition of those who [were] before
us hath come down to us from hand to hand, for the
holy Mar Isho-yahbh was able and sufficient to do all
things, especially since the rank in which he stood and
opportunity answered³ to [his call] - that the greater
part of this earth came from Ḥědhattâ while that of
the other [buildings] came from Adiabene. Now there
is no mud like unto this, and it is better and harder
than lime: let therefore no one of you take away any
of it, for when, by the hand of God, we have built
this temple, we will pull down all the dwellings of the
community, and build them up again with this earth".
Now when the solitaries, some of whom were friends
and some of whom were adversaries, heard these things
I
—
3 I. e., "favoured him."
2
23023.
<pb n="401"/>
they wished to steal from that earth, and to plaster'
their cells with it; and since Isho-yahbh wished to be
relieved from the expense and trouble of having the
earth carried away himself he remained the whole of
that Sabbath in the patriarchal cell, and he proclaimed
concerning himself, "I am suffering from sickness". Now
when [the monks] discovered this opportunity, with
laughing and rejoicing they stole away that earth, even
sweeping the place where it had stood with a broom,
and carried it to their cells. And when Isho-yahbh
heard concerning this thing he rejoiced with an exceed-
ing great joy, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="207"/> and when he came and saw
that the place where the earth had been was swept and
sprinkled, with a chaste and holy smile he answered
and said to them, "Ye have not so much as left behind
even a little of that earth; may the Lord pardon and
forgive us all!"
CHAPTER X.
OF HOW GOD, THE LORD OF ALL, MOVED MEN TO PUT
FORTH THEIR HANDS TO OPPOSE THIS GREAT WORK.
Now when the holy Mâr Åsho-yahbh had begun to
lay the foundations of this temple, the materials [required]
and the wages which had to be given to the labourers
and the builders became more and more day by day.
And because, according to the report which I have
received by tradition, he had taken upon himself to
build [the temple] in difficult times, there rose up a
A Compare Arab. "to plaster a wall with mud or lime."
eee
<pb n="402"/>certain governor and ruler of the dominion of Môşul,
a greedy and avaricious man, who afflicted this monas-
tery by the workings of envious devils, and who
mulcted this congregation of fifteen thousand silver*
[pieces]. And moreover the believing men of Adiabene
were smitten with envy against [Mâr Isho-yahbh],
and said, "Why, while the Metropolitan throne of Adia-
bene is going to ruin, dost thou build a temple in
Bêth Abhe"? All these things [happened] by the
counsel of Satan. Also in this assembly when [Mår
Isho-yahbh] was sitting at table on one of the feast
days with the brethren, in the common room, some of
them, being incited thereto by certain mischief-makers,
rebelled against him, saying, "Thou hast pulled down
our temple, and we no longer want thee to build a
temple for us; get thee out and depart from our mon-
astery. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="208"/> We are under [the authority of the
Patriarch, pass on to thine own dominion, and tarry no
longer amongst us". And when the humble and gentle
Iman perceived secretly the working of Satan the Evil
One, he said to them, "May God forgive you. It is
3 I. e., o dirhams. This was only to be expected in
an eastern country. There are many places to this day in
Mesopotamia where if a householder begins to make any re-
pairs to his house, or to re-plaster it with lime, the local
authorities at once assess his taxes at a higher rate and compel
him to make payment immediately. Commencing to build
a church when times were hard, money scarce, and provisions
dear, was sufficient sign to the Muḥammedan mind that the
Nestorian monks of Bêth 'Abhê had more money than they
knew what to do with. .
2 Read on. For other instances of
"to set up
the back," i. e., "to resist, to rebel," see Payne Smith, Thes.,
col. 639.
<pb n="403"/>
not you [who] are speaking these things but that being
who hath never tasted peace, and who delighteth not in
peace. I shall not depart, unless ye drag me out on
my feet, until I shall have built this holy temple". And
he spake this also unto them, "When I began to pull
down the first temple, our Lord knoweth that I was
master of one hundred and fifty sûzê; but for all these
expenses which ye see, for behold [only] one half
of the building has been completed, I do not know
where our Lord hath made ready: but quiet yourselves,
and fret not with care and anxiety, for our Lord will
build for Himself without taking anything either from
you or from your common funds.
CHAPTER XI.
OF THE SATANIC VISION WHICH [ABBA] ÎSHO-DADH, ONE
OF THE OLD MEN OF THIS CONGREGATION SAW, AND
OF THE MONEY WHICH HE FOUND.
Now the holy Mâr Isho-yahbh was in trouble and
anxiety concerning the expenses, for the first day of
the week was near in which the builder would ask him
for seven thousand zûzê, being the wages of himself
and of his workmen, according to the contract for the work
which he had taken upon himself [to do] for him. And
the brethren saw him during the after-supper service
of the first day of the week with a gloomy face, and
his colour was green by reason of weariness, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="209"/>
* The 20 is explained by dirham. The gold dînâr which
weighed from sixty-five to seventy-two grains was equal in
value to twenty dirhams, or about 10% English shillings.
<pb n="404"/>and care and anxiety, because the morrow after the
first day of the week was the time fixed for weighing
to the builders seven thousand zûzê, although as has
already been said, he had not a single zûzâ in his
possession. Now what did He Who hath the power,
and to Whom nothing is difficult, do? He uncovered
before him hidden and buried and hoarded up trea-
sures, and placed them in his hand without labour
and without toil.
Now there was in the monastery Abba Îsho-dâdh,
an old man, the master of Mår George' the Catholi-
cus, and the master of Mâr Abraham' the Catholicus
our Father, and his cell was [situated] on the top of
the ridge [of the mountain] which is between two
valleys, to the right as thou goest up to the head of
the spring, and opposite to the fortress which is called
the 'Little'.' And when the service of the night was
ended, he went up at the conclusion of the psalms for
the morning to his cell, and as he was going along the
path God's goodness moved him, and he looked to his
* a spiritual father, as opposed to
2 He was elected Patriarch, A. D. 825.
p. 435; ii. p. 616.
a
natural father.
See B. O., ii.
3 He was elected Patriarch, A. D. 835. See B. O., .
p. 436; iii. 1. p. 617.
4 Thomas of Margâ means that he himself lived in the time
of this Abraham.
3 From this it seems tolerably clear that the Monastery of
Bêth 'Abhê was built upon a mountain peak between two val-
leys; in the valley on the east flowed the Upper Zab, and in
the valley on the west flowed a river or stream into which the
spring here mentioned fell. The fortress surnamed the 'Little'
was probably on the other side of the Zâb, and could be seen
from the monastery.
<pb n="405"/>
right hand, towards the east, and he saw in an unin-
habited and ruined cell a fire burning in its little oven;
and just as the blessed Moses said," "I will go and see
this great sight, why the bush burneth not", so also the
blessed man thought, "What can be the cause of this fire
which now burneth in the ruined cell? I will go there
and see". And when he had come near, he saw Satan
in the form of a black old man eating bread which he
baked on the oven, and because, according to what I
I have learned about this whole matter from the holy
Mâr Abraham the Catholicus, he was a mighty and a
holy man, he adjured Satan by the word of our Lord
to depart. And straightway that oven was rent in
twain, and an earthen jar' full of zûzê was cast forth
at the feet of Abba isho-dâdh; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="210"/> and it broke
immediately, and the zûzê poured out with a chinking
sound³, and he bowed low to the ground before God
lest peradventure it was a phantasm. And when the
zúzê had been felt by his hands, and he knew of a
certainty that it was money in very truth, he took the
cross which was upon his neck, and buried it among
them; and the blessed old man girded up his feet, and
ran swiftly from the one valley to the other valley
until he arrived at the cell of Rabban. And he knocked
at the door, and the monk* who guarded the door
* Exodus iii. 3.
3 Dai. e., sul jar. See Brit. Mus. MSS. Rich 7203,
fol. 1516, col 1; and Orient. 2441, fol. 3286, col. 2.
ܨܘܨܘ 3
4 The кOIVOẞiαкòs, was a man who had decided to
adopt the monkish habit but who had not yet taken up his
abode in the KOIVóßiov, or was. It would seem that the
coenobium was distinguished from the outer cells, 4.5 450,
<pb n="406"/>answered him, and he said to him, "Go in and tell
Mâr Isho-yahbh that Åsho-dâdh is at the door". And
the Metropolitan answered and said, "What can the
old man want of us at this time [of night]"? And
the old man having gone in, said, "Rise up, for thy
prayer hath been heard. I saw thy face of despair
in the evening and during the after-supper service,
and I knew that thou wast in need, and I offered
prayer on thy behalf to Christ that He would not
allow thy face to be put to the blush". And when he
had learned concerning that which had happened, Mâr
Isho-yahbh answered and said, "Perhaps it is a phan-
tasm of devils". And [Mâr Isho-dâdh] said to him,
"Master, I went down on my knees before God, and
I also felt the zûzê, and I placed the cross which was
upon me among them; rise up and let us go [to the
ruined cell] before it dawns [when] we should be seen”.
which were scattered about in the neighbouring mountains, al-
though they belonged to the congregation of the monastery.
The anchorites or solitaries, 2 who lived in these cells,
were accustomed to go to the church of the monastery on certain
occasions and on Sundays to partake of the Eucharist. The
2 were the monks who lived in cells, which were separate
from each other, but which were grouped round about the church,
the whole cluster of buildings comprising the 2, or residence
in common. The anos, with its outlying cells, was a later
development of monastic dwelling; compare what is said of Job
the Monk (he flourished about A. D. 550), ställe jääb ü
,and he founded coenobia and cells وكانتْ من قَبْلُ كالديارات
which formerly were like unto places where monks dwelt in
common." See B. O., iii. i. p. 431, col. I, at the foot; Hoff-
mann, Auszüge, Notes 1330, 1332, pp. 171, 172; Du Cange,
Glossarium, col. 677.
1, a title of honour.
2
ܓܫ ܵfor ܓܫܬ
<pb n="407"/>
And they took the monk, and the three of them ran
and took the zûzê, and Rabban came back to his cell.
And the old man said to the Metropolitan, "By the
living' grave of Rabban how many thousand zûzê hast
thou?" And he said to him, "Seven"; and when they
had weighed the money, the weight came out exactly
seven thousand [zûsê]. Thus are the saints who are
consumed with the love of God, and who desire to
please Him in every kind of manner, perfected by His
munificent gift.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="211"/>
CHAPTER XII.
OF ANOTHER TREASURE WHICH CHRIST OUR LORD GAVE
TO HIM.
Now when the builder had received this specified
sum [of money], seven thousand zûzê, the holy man,
[trusting] in [his] heavenly Hope (on Whom those who
trust are never put to shame), made an agreement with
him as to the price to be paid for another specified'
piece of work, viz., thirteen thousand [zûzê]. And the
days and months having passed during the interval [of
the course of the work], behold the temple had al-
ready come to the upper rafter corbels, 3 and the first
I. e., which shall live again on the Day of Judgment.
3кшμα. See Payne Smith, Thes., col. 2719;
Buxtorf (ed. Fisher), p. 740.
3, a new word. This word seems to mean the projec-
ting stone corbels which are laid upon the uppermost layer of
bricks or stone on the walls of the church upon which rafters
or beams of the roof are to rest. Compare "plur. Bux-
torf, (ed. Fisher), p. 344, col. 2; Levy, Chald. Wörterbuch.,
<pb n="408"/>day of the appointed week, on the fourth day of which the
builder was to come to ask for thirteen thousand zûzê,
arrived. And the [bones of] the back of the pious Mâr
Isho-yahbh were broken by reason of his fear, and he
brought to the God of the universe a cry that He would not
be unmindful of His temple, and that he himself might
not become an object of derision like that foolish builder
who began to build and was not able to finish. And
when the first day of the week had passed by, the
builder began to say to the Metropolitan, "Make ready
the zûzê, and do not forget"; now by reason of this
[speech] also, the trouble of the Metropolitan was in-
creased, because the builder, who was a heretic,³ wished
to make him a laughing-stock. And [the Metropolitan]
answered and said, "Be not avaricious, behold, the
zûzé are weighed out, and are set aside for thee;"
but although he uttered courageous words with his
mouth, he bore grief and sorrow in his heart. Now
there was a very old man [who lived] opposite the
monastery from Gâr Kâhnê, and he also was moved by
grace to give what he had by him for the building of
the temple. And on the morning of the third day of
the week he rose up, leaning upon his staff, -now he
was a man who was [only] able to come to the temple
to receive the Holy Mysteries <pb type="textAllignment"  n="212"/> once a week-
and with the morning he knocked at the door of the
p. 218, col. 1.
Hoffmann thinks that reîσa, the projecting
part of the roof, the eaves, parapet, coping.
* Literally, "the last first day of the week," i.e., the Sunday
of the last of the weeks of the period, at the expiration of
which sho'-yahbh had undertaken to pay the money.
2 St. Luke xiv. 30.
3 I. e., a Jacobite.
4 See supra, p. 240, note 3.
<pb n="409"/>
Patriarchal cell; and the keeper of the door answered
him, and made known [to the Metropolitan] concerning
him. And the Metropolitan being moved at the report
of his coming went out to meet him, and answered
and said to him, "Rabban, why hast thou taken all
this great trouble to come to me? If thou hadst any
reason thou shouldst have sent to me that I might
come to thee". The old man said, "However great
may be the love and ready disposition which we have
to bestow upon each other, the treasury of the Giver
is rich enough to recompense us all for our love; but
I entreat thee this day to take the trouble to go down
to [my] cell which thou seest". The Metropolitan saith
to him, "During all this long time which I have been
with thee thou hast never asked me to go down to
thy cell, until this day in which destruction taketh away
my life"; [the old man] saith to him, "Rise up, and be
not distressed, for the deliverance of thy Lord is at
hand". And when the Metropolitan heard this, [it was]
as if peace came upon his soul; now he was accustomed
to receive such-like [consolation] from [the conversa-
tion] of Abbâ Ishő-dâdh. And he rose up and went
down with the old man, [who] said to him, "Take this
monk with thee, for we shall have need of him"; and
he went down [with them] according to his word. And
when the breaking of bread drew nigh and he was
urging him to take some refreshment,' it was not easy
for him to make the Metropolitan take any. And the
old man answered and said to him, "For how much
money wilt thou sell me the keeping of thy fast this
* Literally "blessing", because it was food given with a
blessing.
fff
<pb n="410"/>day? Know also that we monks are under thy control,
and that we know the time for keeping [the fast], and
the time and season for the loosing of love". And
when they had eaten and drunk the old man said to
him, "Mar Metropolitan, I saw thee in the spirit standing
in a dark house, and thou wast calling us all to thy
help, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="213"/> and I knew that thou wast in sore need
of money for the expenses of the building of the temple.
And I swear by the prayer of Rabban that I possessed
neither gold nor silver, for by the labour of my hands
have I ministered unto my life day by day as thou
knowest. But I have a small sum of money deposited
with me, and if thou wilt promise to pay it back I
I will give it to thee". The Metropolitan said to him,
"How much is that which is deposited with thee, father"?
and he said to him, "I swear by [our] love, that I know
not. Two old women who were going to Jerusalem from
my own country of Beth Beghâsh came to me some
twenty years ago, and placed in my hands this napkin;³
but how much is that something which they placed [in
my hands] I know not, only I know that it is much.
And they went and never came back. And they com-
I
Compare
Tswear by′ ܠܐ ܡܫܝܚܐ ";T swear by Jesus“ ܠܐ ܝܫܘܥ
Christ" (Payne Smith, Thes., col. 1869); and
"I swear by the day of the Resurrection." Wright, Arabic
Grammar, vol. II, pp. 162, 328.
2 Literally; "as ye know."
3 is a word new to me.
,calceus ܣܐܘܬܐ — cannot ܣܪܠܵܐ
for it would be impossible to hide a large quantity of money
under it, but it mayσάßavov, ·
-
Chald
un morceau carré de toile doublee سبانی or سبنية Arab
et de couleur, servant à envelopper des habits ou des livres."
Dozy, Supplement, tom. I. p. 631, col. 1.
<pb n="411"/>
manded me, saying, 'If we return, this something be-
longeth to us, but if we are smitten by death on the
journey, then give it to this monastery'. Take then
this something, and if they return,-but they will
never return-thou must pay it back; and if on the
other hand they do not return, there will be none to
ask it from thee, and thou wilt not need to pay it
back". And when the Metropolitan heard [these things]
he received it all with joy, and he weighed the money,
which amounted to thirteen thousand zûzê, and gave
it to the builders in all gladness. Now I have heard
these things from many, and as I have learned [them]
so have I set [them] down in the writing of the history
of the holy Mår Isho-yahbh.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="214"/>
CHAPTER XIIL
OF THE MIRACLE WHICH CHRIST WROUGHT BY THE HANDS
OF THE HOLY MAR ISHO-YAHBH.
Now when the blessed man isho-yahbh was building
this holy temple, every man was extending help to him
by his labour, and by gifts from what he possessed,
the rich man according to his large means, and the
poor man according to his small means. And there
was a certain gardener in the village of Ḥadhûdh, and
this man, as I have learned concerning him, was deaf,
and this [affliction] had happened to him from the days
of his youth; and having expended much money upon
physicians that he might be cured, he was disappointed
in this expectation. Now this man also, together with
<pb n="412"/>the other people who were contributing from their
wares, brought to the monastery a load of onions. And
when they received his gift there was here a monk
who was acquainted with him, and he took him and
carried him to the Patriarchal cell, to the Metropolitan,
that he might be blessed by him; and he made known
to the holy man concerning the gift which he had
brought, and that he could not hear at all. And the
Metropolitan was very sorry for him, and he made for
him a washing from the cross of Rabban, and dismissed
him, saying, "We trust in our Lord that He will give
thee [the power of] hearing". And when he had
mounted his ass and had gone forth, he arrived at the
ascent where the young asses run about, and he heard
the noise of the wild goats which fled frightened, and
again he marvelled and was astonished, for he heard
also the sound of the footsteps of the ass. And when
he had drawn nigh to the village, and he, being filled
with wonder and amazement, heard the crowing of
the cocks and the barking of the dogs, because of
his joy he could not believe that which had happened
to him. But when he went into the door of his court-
yard, one of his children saw him, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="215"/> and he
heard the child say to his mother, "Father hath come;"
and he made known to his wife all these things; thus
Iwas he healed by the prayers of that holy man, and
he was whole until his death. Now this [story] I heard
from the old and venerable Rabban Elisha; may his
memory be blessed! It is well known that wonders
and miracles were wrought also by all the holy men
whose histories I have written, but time in its course*
.ܒܥܘܬܩܗ for ܒܥܘܬܒܗ ܃
<pb n="413"/>
hath covered them up because they were not written
down at the time by those who were acquainted with
them.
CHAPTER XIV.
OF THE COMPLETION OF THE TEMPLE, AND OF THE DEATH
OF MAR ÎSHO-YAHBH.
Now when the temple was entirely built except the
roof, he left off for that year, and waited so that the
building might settle down, and in the following year
he finished both it and the martyrium, and consecrated
it. And he removed [the bodies of] Rabban Jacob,
and Mâr Catholicus and the fathers who were with
them, and laid them in the martyrium. And he had
made up his mind, if life had been granted to him, to
[re] build the monastery generally' and the porter's
lodge with stones and lime. But after the fast of our
Lord, on the Friday which cometh after the Sunday
of renewal, the hymn for which [begins], “In the Cross
of our Lord Jesus Christ", he put off the garment of
the body and the weight of its afflictions, and he de-
parted to the land of light and gladness; and he was
laid with the fathers his companions in the dwelling
* here means the Abbot's cell and the cells of all the
other monks.
* I. c., the first Sunday after Easter Sunday, following the
εßdoµàç diakaivńσчμos, "the week of renewal," so called because
the resurrection of Christ renewed mankind each Easter Sunday.
Σάρον Σταυρου και κυριακή καινή or κυριακή νέα - Dominica in Albis
See Du Cange, Glossarium, col. 770; col. 88 s. v. avtíñaσxa;
Payne Smith, Thes., col. 1207; Nilles, De Rationibus Festorum
Mobilium utriusque Ecclesiae Occidentalis atque Orientalis,
Vienna, 1868, p. 39.
<pb n="414"/>of the Metropolitan of Adiabene, that is to say, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="216"/>
in Bêth Mâr Ķardagh. May his prayers be a strong wall
[to protect] this monastery against all injuries, Amen!
CHAPTER XV.
THE HISTORY OF THE HOLY MÂR CYRIACUS, THE HEAD
OF THE MONASTERY OF BETH "ABHE AND BISHOP OF
THE CITY OF BALADH.
The composition of man testifieth that the constitu-
tion of [his] mortal nature hath received from Him
Who alone is, two opposing parts, between which there
is [always] contention, because each endeavoureth always
to attract its fellow to itself, and according to its twofold
character He hath prepared two habitations for it. This
[dwelling], viz., that in which we now are, He hath set
for the training and exercise of our rational nature, so
that by severe strivings we may gain possession of
some of the treasure of contest, and become rich in
those things which befit our rational nature, and the
honour with which we are honoured; but that [dwelling]
for which we look, hath He prepared for [our] delight
and for [our] happiness which shall be beyond all change,
that we may live a life, without the least [inclination]
to turn aside from it, in a dwelling which is meet
to endure for ever. And He hath given [us] power
and might to possess both these [dwellings] unless our
own personal matters. should hinder our freewill choice,
and therefore the choice of good things and of the
I wanderingly.
1
<pb n="415"/>
inheritance of the happiness which is expected [to come]
belongeth to us.
Now the blessed Rabban Mår Cyriacus, the glorious
things concerning whom we have now come to relate,
having understood this, laboured abundantly, in this
world full of strife, and abounding in contests, and
through this behaviour he followed after, and acquired,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="217"/> and traded in all those things which are con-
venient for and befit that rest which, according to the
word of the divine Paul,' is preserved for us in heaven,
whence we expect our Vivifier, our Lord Jesus Christ,
Who shall change the body of our humility, that it may
become like unto His glorious body.
CHAPTER XVI.'
OF THE ORIGIN OF THE BLESSED MÂR CYRIACUS, AND OF
HIS COMING TO THIS MONASTERY [OF BETH 'ABHE].
This blessed man Cyriacus was descended from a
family of Gebhiltà, an orthodox city in the country of
Ţârîhân, and he was the son of wealthy people who
were diligent worshippers in the fear of God. Through
the care of his parents he was trained in doctrine in
the church of their native city, before the famous and
much enlightened teacher Rabban Gûryâ,³ a disciple of
the master of masters, Rabban Bâbhai, the teacher and
founder of schools. * And wishing to lead the life of
Hebrews iv. 8-10; Phil. iii. 21.
2 I. e., Tîrhân. See supra, p. 290, note 2.
3 See supra, p. 303.
For his life and the names of the schools which he founded
see supra, p. 296.
<pb n="416"/>an ascetic, and to inscribe himself for spiritual labour
among the hosts of those who do battle against the
body and the lusts thereof, he heard concerning this
holy monastery from his teacher Rabban Gûryâ,' who
had heard and learned from Rabban Bâbhai concerning
its famous and holy men, and how their course of life
shone with splendour, for Rabban Bâbhai drew every man
to the sight of the glorious light of their excellent
virtues. And Mâr Cyriacus went forth, and made straight
the path of his journey, and arrived at this monastery
when Rabban Mâr Aḥâ, the glorious acts of whose life
we have written a little way back,* was its head. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="218"/>
And when he had finished his period of serving in the
monastery, the holy Mâr Aḥâ permitted him to go
forth to a [separate] cell, and he was endowed with
prayers and blessings, and he dwelt in silence. Now
if I came to write down all that I have heard con-
cerning him, and concerning the chastity and abstinence
of his life, and his labours, and his toils difficult to
bear and to carry out, it would be great and heavy
work both for me to write, and for thee to read,
[Oʻ‘Abhd-isho']; but I will pass over them briefly, giving
examples of them as it were in short hand, and I will
make selections from them referring to different matters,
and will lay them [before thee] to please thee.
Now the old man Ḥenân-isho, the head of the con-
gregation, whom I met in this place, and who was
his neighbour, related to me that from the day in which
he went forth to his cell, until the end of his life, wine
never entered therein, and that he only took it at table
* For the history of Gûryâ see Bk. iii. chap. 3, supra, p. 303.
See supra, p. 248ff.
3
- ܣܝܡܝܘܢ
– σημεῖον.

And
<pb n="417"/>
with the brethren when he felt that it was necessary
for him to hide his manner of life. And he made
his cell a judgment hall for himself, and he set Christ
as Judge over the throne of his understanding, and of
all the thoughts which rose up in him he extinguished
the evil and watered the pure; and he was making
them appear before the Judge at all seasons.
when, according to what I have heard concerning him,
he had passed through [his] period of novitiate, and had
[served in the monastery] a few years, as is commanded
by the fathers, "A novice shall not serve overmuch in
the service of the monastery, that he be not injured by
devils," he found excellent means for extinguishing the
emotions and impulses of the body. He made two
thick, leather straps; one of them [was] for binding
round his two knees, and when he was sitting down
and reading, or eating, or sleeping, he used to put his
bent knees inside it, so that [his legs] might neither
be stretched out, nor the sinews of the body be extended,
and the spirit be filled, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="219"/> and the passion of
the body stirred up, according to what the holy man
Basil wrote to the blessed man Gregory³ his brother,
saying, "When thou sleepest stretch not out thy legs,
.ܕܕܒܪܗ Read “
Basil the Great was born at Caesaraea A. D. 329, and
died 379. According to 'Abhd-Isho' he wrote a book on the
"Six days, and several Questions, Discourses, and lengthy Epistles:"
,.0 .See B .ܤܡ ܟܬܒܐ ܕܫܬܬ ܝܘܡܐ܆ ܘܫܢ̈ܐܠܐ ܣܒܝܣܐ܆ ܘܘܬܐܡܪܐ ܘܐܓܪܬܐ ܒܐܪܝܟܐ
iii. 1, p. 21. For the Greek text of Basil's AσкηTIкά or Con-
stitutiones Asceticae, see Migne, Patrologiae Graecae, tom. XXXI.,
coll. 1321-1428.
3 Thomas of Margâ probably refers to Basil's great friend
Gregory Nazianzenus, born about A. D. 329, died about 389.
ggg
<pb n="418"/>and behold thou wilt be at peace from this passion;"
and the other strap [was] for binding round one knee
when he was standing in the vigil of prayer. And he
used to bend one knee like a camel, and bind it round
with the smaller strap, and with the sole of the foot
bent, and holding a rod, [he stood] in that painful
[position] on one leg like a crane,³ that is a ķēlākeså,*
until he was worn out by exhaustion' and fell down;
then he rose up and changed the [leather] ligature to
the other leg until he was wearied, and thus he kept
his vigil until dawn. And the old man Ḥenân-Åshö
told me, saying, “Inasmuch as the situation of my own
* Literally, "the hand of the foot."
Literally, "one knee."
✓ See Payne Smith, Thes., col. 1826.
4 We should expect to be equal to
Kópαž, a
raven; but it probably stands for Dios, or Assos crane (Castle,
Lexicon, pp. 830, 835). Hoffmann believes that the reading of
BC, may stand for sand-Pers.,
"crane-
like"; in this case it is the rendering of Labs Nams. For opp
eagle, DP see Lagarde, Gesammelte Abhandlungen, p. 81,
No. 208; compare also Ahrens, Naturgegenstände, p. 23, No. 46;
and καθεύδουσιν ἐπὶ ἑνὸς πολὸς ἐναλλαξ Aristotle, De Anima-
libus, lib. IX. chap. X. (ed. Didot, t. iii. p. 181).
2007
5 Read, in any case,
but we should have expected
imbecility, infirmity; compare below (text. p. 219, l. 12)
"he flagged", or "languished". Another example of
this word occurs in Land, Anecdota, tom. ii. p. 107, 1. 24; and
supra, p. 33, 1. 21, where we read that Paul the Simple "wove
mats until he was exhausted" .. In Brit. Mus. MSS. Orient.
2441, fol. 3896, col. 2; Rich 7203, fol. 1986, col. 2 -
."emaciation“ نحافة "emaciated" نحيف feebleness ضعف
6 On the stern asceticism of certain monks see Land, Anec-
dota, t. ii. p. 230.
<pb n="419"/>
cell was higher than that of Mâr Cyriacus I could see
him becoming worn out and exhausted by his vigil.
And he used to remain [in this position] for a long
space of time, and by reason of his fatigue he was
insensible of his fervour." Now for his food he
took every evening a dry crust of bread, which he
dipped in water and salt and lived upon; and this
was the manner of his life during the whole time of
his early manhood, and as long as strength was pre-
served in his body." This was the pure heart in which,
according to what the holy man saith, God dwelleth,*
and it was meet that God should hear his prayer; this
was the sincere mind in which the Trinity abideth.³
"Be thou mindful of God and thy mind shall become
a heaven," saith the holy Nilôs. Hail to the new dis-
coveries by which the holy men have become wise!
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="220"/> Each one of them hath found out some new
thing by which he was able to subdue the body which
giveth birth to passions and afflictions, viz., fasting,
prayer, bowings to the ground, vigils, standing on one
foot, together with all the severe war against the
thoughts of the mind, anxious care and weeping for
their souls, meditation upon the hour of death, medita-
ܘܡܢ ܚܡܝܤܩܬܗ ܠܐ ܚܪܓܫ ܗܘܐ ܒܠܐܘܬܗ We should have expected 1
Henân-Isho' means "I saw him becoming gradually worn out
and quite exhausted by this course of life, in which he had
persevered for a long time, and the fatigue of which deprived
him of all sense of the fervour of his mind and will."
22 Corinthians vi. 16.
3 for hip.
* Nilus, the disciple of Chrysostom, became a monk in the
Nitrian desert, and lived in the first half of the Vth century of
our era; according to 'Abhd-Isho' he "composed two admirable
volumes," (afte³ allo; see B. O., iii. 1, p. 48.
<pb n="420"/>tion upon the hour of judgment, and meditation upon
the hour of Gehenna; three [subjects for] anxious thought,
and three [subjects for] meditation, spiritual and mental,
for which monks in very truth should have a care, for
by them is a monk preserved and exalted, and by
them he mounteth to the grade of perfection. Now
in this world perfection is given as a pledge," not by
insensibility to passions, God forbid, but by not being
subject unto them.
Now when the mind of this our holy father had
been trained and exercised in these things for a long
time, the covering of the passions was lifted off from
his mind, and his mind shone, and his understanding
became bright, and he became wise to guard the trea-
sures of his success by the watchfulness of his soul.
"For a man to labour in the virtues," saith one of the
Saints, "is an easy thing [to do], but to preserve them
from spoliation belongeth to the perfect." Wherefore
also when God the Lord of all saw that [Mâr Cyriacus]
Iwith all his heart and with all his soul had committed
himself to keep His commandments, and to fulfil His
will, he honoured and glorified him by the miracles
which he wrought, and by the revelations which he
received, and by the other mighty things which took
place by his hands; now this [honour] was not given
to [any] other person in his time, and little by little,
by the might of his prayer, I shall demonstrate this
fact.
“like a pledge." This word is not in any native
lexicon known to me.
1
<pb n="421"/>
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="221"/>
CHAPTER XVII.
OF THE CALL OF OUR FATHER RABBAN CYRIACUS TO THE
HEADSHIP OF THE MONASTERY.
Now since for the sake of the truth the holy Mar
Cyriacus chose labours such as these, and afflictions
which humble the body, and bore, according to the
word of Mark the Monk, the suffering of the bending
of the legs and back; that he might follow after his
Master along the Apostolic road, being bound with
chains and carrying [his] cross;-that is to say, having
driven out from himself all passions, and having endured'
the afflictions which [arose] from this patience in the
knowledge of the truth, in the hope of the good things
which [were to come] afterwards, he made his mind
like a swift eagle, which mounteth up with gladness in
the upper heights, and he bowed the eyes of his body
beneath the yoke of the burden of Christ, that they
might not stray to lying sights.
Now when there was a seeking for a head to stand
up in this congregation, the choice and agreement of
the whole brotherhood [fell] upon him to hold the
office of head over them," and with much labour they
established him, and entrusted to him the direction³
of the manner of their lives. And he established over-
seers to superintend non-spiritual matters, and he him-
self sat in the Abbot's cell according to the custom of
asceticism, there being brought to him every evening,
according to tradition, a piece of bread and an onion
ܡܤܒܪ Read 1
ܩܝܘܡܘܬܐ Read 3
ܪܫܢܘܬܗܘܢ Read -
<pb n="422"/>from the common [table]. And it came to pass that
when want afflicted and distressed the monastery, and
[the monks] did not know where they were to find
means of subsistence, because in that year the locusts
had devoured all the seed crops, and they were obliged
to sow summer grass, he went into the town [hoping]
to borrow money at interest from the merchants, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="222"/>
and this he succeeded in doing; and while all the monks
were wondering anxiously about this matter, and where
they would be able to find money to pay it back, God
performed an act by means of the holy man, the son
of His house.
CHAPTER XVIII.
OF THE FIRST MIRACLE WHICH CHRIST WROUGHT BY HIS
HANDS AND OF THE REST OF HIS MIRACLES.
Now there was in the city of Môsul a certain Arab
whose belief was akin to ours, and his offerings and
gifts to the congregations of the monks were well
known. Now this man had an only beloved son, be-
sides whom he had no other [child], and this son fell
into a mortal sickness, from which the physicians des-
paired of [all] hope of recovery' for him. And when
his father had promised to give everything which he
possessed to save his son's life, -now he was very rich,
but he accounted all his riches of no value, since the
heir was doomed to inherit the grave-that power
which worked upon the disciples who were in Joppa³
Literally, "they cut off from him the hope of healing."
2 Literally, "one who maketh inherit."
3 Acts ix. 36.
<pb n="423"/>
to send to Simon Peter on behalf of the life of Tabitha,
and also the angel [that told] Cornelius to send to
Simon Peter' that the light of the doctrine of Christ
might come to him, appeared to that Ishmaelite in a
vision, and said to him, "There is a monk, in the Mon-
astery of Beth Abhê, send and bring him, and he shall
heal thy son;" and when he heard this he went for help
to Mår Mâran-zěkhâ, Bishop of Nineveh, and entreated
him to send and bring the monk to him. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="223"/> And
when he asked him, "What is the name of the monk
who appeared to thee?" he told him, saying, "His name
is not known to me." And the pious Mâr Mâran-zěkhá,
holy in all things, wrote a letter to the holy Mâr Cyri-
acus that he would send "a means of grace" to that man,
and he wrote also how he had appeared to him in a
vision; and the blessed Cyriacus sent a washing from the
cross, of Rabban by the hands of two brethren, and he
gave himself to prayer on behalf [of the Arab's son].
Now when those two brethren had departed and had
given the "means of grace" and God's mercy which they
had with them to the man, and he had made his son
drink it, the boy straightway stood up, and asked for
food; and his parents marvelled, and they praised and
glorified God. And this [matter] was proclaimed in all
the city, and the holy man Cyriacus became famous
and well known.
* Acts x. 5.
3
literally means "misericordia," but here it refers to the
holy water which the Nestorians were accustomed to give to
the sick to drink, or to "pulvis loci, ubi martyres coronati
fuerunt, quem oleo et aqua dilutum ad extremam unctionem
adhibent." See the passages and authorities quoted in Payne
Smith, Thes., coll. 1315, 1316.
<pb n="424"/>CHAPTER XIX.
OF HOW THAT MAN CAME TO THIS MONASTERY, AND OF
HOW HE REWARDED IT WITH A NOBLE RECOMPENSE, AS
WAS MEET, [AND OF THE REST OF THE MIRACLES OF
THE HOLY MAR CYRIACUS].
Now just as by reason of the glorious crown of
sublime things with which the nation of the Jews was
crowned after their going up from Babylon, it is written
in the prophet Zechariah, "The nations which dwell in
many towns shall come, and the inhabitants of one
[city] shall go to another, and shall say, 'Come, let us
go and pray before the Lord;' and many peoples and
mighty nations shall come to entreat the Lord, the
mighty One, in Jerusalem.' And ten men, from all the
tongues of the nations, shall take hold of the skirt of
a man who is a Jew, and shall say to him 'Let us go
with thee to Jerusalem, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="224"/> for we have heard that the
Lord is with thee"," even thus was it wrought in this
case. For when that man saw that he had gotten back
his son safe and sound from the mouth of the grave,
and from the maw of hell by means of God's "mercy"
which had been sent to him, he decided rightly, saying,
"I will go and reward with [gifts of] love and kindness
him who hath done this act of grace for me, and who
hath delivered and given to me out of the teeth of
death the only branch which I possess, and the staff
of my old age, because of this thing;" and he took
his son and a number of his servants, and others joining
themselves to them they became a great company, and
he came to this monastery. Now when the brethren
took the old man to Rabban in the Abbot's cell, as
Zechariah viii. 21-23.
<pb n="425"/>
soon as he had gone in and seen him, he answered
and said in the Arabic tongue, "This is the old man
whom I saw proclaiming to me 'peace', and saying,
'Send to Beth 'Abhê, and bring from there a monk
and he shall heal thy son""; and wonder took hold
upon every man. And he took out ten thousand zûzê,
and gave to Rabban, but Rabban thought wisely, "If
I take all this money the gift will become a loss." And
he answered and said to him, "Blessed art thou before
God, O old man, and blessed shalt thou be; but we
do not require this [money], for it is not good that
the healing which our Lord hath given us should be
[sold] for money." And the old man with entreaties
and tears spake, saying, "If thou dost not take them,
I will throw them away, for one nail of my son which
through thy prayers hath been restored to me, is better
to me than all the money and riches which I possess."
Rabban said to him, "Since it must be thus, give the
money to such and such a merchant who hath [a debt]'
against us, and thy act of grace will be acceptable
unto God the Lord of all, and to us." The Arab saith to
him, "How much hath he against you?" and he said, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="225"/>
"Eight thousand [zúze]"; and he left here two thousand
[zuze], and [with] the remainder he went and paid the
debt, anxiety concerning the payment of which troubled
the monks greatly; and thus were those men dismissed,
and they went away rejoicing.
The very old man Rabban Ishö-yahbh, [surnamed]
the Long, who had received the tonsure at the hands
of Rabban Cyriacus related to me the following:-"One
day at the time of the after-supper service on the first
Strike out in the text p. 224, l. 22.
hhh
<pb n="426"/>day of the week I was selected by the potter' to go
to the spring, and to bring water³ to the tank* of the
monastery. And there was a certain old man who was
called Bakhôs (Bacchus) bar-Kusțôi,' and he had near
his cell a large olive tree from which he pressed out
thirty measures of oil every year, and the tree was there-
fore precious to him, and he took care of it, and never
missed watering it. Now this man was spying upon
_me, and watching my footsteps; and when I had gone
some distance from his cell, he went out secretly, and
opened' the channel and drew off water and brought
it into his cell to water the olive tree. And when I
had come and had made the water to flow in the
1. e., Kepаμеúç. Compare Hex. Jeremiah xviii. 2;
Hark. Romans ix. 21.
Probably the spring referred to in Bk. IV. chap. XI; see
supra, p. 404.
3 I. c., he was to make a channel so that the water might
flow down from the spring into the rock-hewn cistern of the
monastery.
4 fem. of . Compare Arab. basin of water,
.Isaiah li. I וְאֶל־מַקְבָת בּוֹר נְקַרְתָּם: reservoir; and
-with the Persian ter ,ܩܘܤܛܢܛܝܢܘܣ a diminutive of ܣܘܣܛܘܝ 5
mination ĉe; compare
6 Literally "in his cell."
7 5 means to make an opening through which water may
flow; compare the Arabic, the mouth of a streamlet, the
opening of a tank, and a torrent filling the valley, Lane,
Arabic-English Lexicon, p. 303. For examples of ✓ a com-
Wright, Kalila/a ܘܠܐ ܝܕܥ ܐܡܬܝ ܕܡܬܬܪܥ ܥܠܘܗܝ ܡܡܘܠܐ ܕܪܘܓܙܐ pare
ܬܪ̈ܥܢ ܗܘܝ ;20 .1 ,312 .ibid., p ܕܠܐ ܢܬܬܪ̈ܥܢ ܚܢܓܬܐ ;20 .1 ,172 .t. II. p
and Dimnah, p. 289, 1. 24; a Land, Anecdota,
ibid, p. 119. 24; 3
ibid., p. 121. 14.
<pb n="427"/>
channel towards the monastery, and was going away
to follow along with the water, through [my] fear of
the others, [this old man] went out, being moved so
to do by his greediness, and made an opening in the
channel to let in the water to his cell. And when I saw
this piece of folly, the fear lest the potter should
beat me being vividly depicted before my eyes, it was
exceedingly grievous unto me. And behold the blessed
Cyriacus was in the place of the after-supper service,'
and he heard my voice complaining, and he asked me,
'What aileth thee, my son? And I said to him, 'The
monks will not allow the water to come to the mon-
astery.' Now Rabban Cyriacus was, as every one hath
told me, of a hot-tempered disposition, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="226"/> and was
[easily] made furious with anger, and when he was
moved to wrath he was not to be controlled. And he
straightway came down in haste from the place of
the after-supper service, and went along by the side
of the water, and found that it ran into the place where
Bacchus was. And he cried out, saying, 'Bacchus,
Bacchus;' now Bacchus was silent, and was dried up
through his terror. And Cyriacus answered and said,
'Because I see that this olive tree hindereth thee from
pleasing God, even as that fig tree which was in the
monastery of the blessed Pachomius became a stumb-
ling-block to the simple youths [there], and because,
I moreover, while every one [else] is occupied in the
after-supper service, thou art corrupting the Calum-
niator by [thy] solicitude for thy olive tree, the life
3 probably a part of the church, not refectory.
I. e., your deeds defile the Devil, and make him appear
blacker than he is otherwise.
<pb n="428"/>which maketh thy olive tree to grow shall be taken
from it, and the earth in which are its roots shall be-
come salt and dried up, and God shall make it wither
during this night, and thou shalt have no gratification
from it except wood for burning and [for making] a
roof; and so, with the morning of the [next] day, he
found that olive tree dried up from its roots, and black
as pitch."
And again, a very old man whose name was Tûmânâ
related to me that there was a certain monk employed
in the monastery whose name was Khusrau, and that
it was customary every week for a monk employed in
the monastery to be set apart for the purpose of waiting
upon that holy old' man in Rabban's cell. Now it hap-
pened that one week this Khusrau was set apart [for
this duty]. And when he had stood at the door two
or three days, and he could not endure [the service],
he came to the monastery to his companions without
the knowledge of the old man. And when the evening
was come, and the blessed old man was waiting for
him to bring him [his] food, Khusrau neglected him
and treated him with contempt. And behold, the old
man holding his staff came himself to the monastery-
now Khusrau by reason of his fear had laid himself
down upon a bed, and feigned himself to be sick-
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="227"/> and Rabban called him, "Khusrau, Khusrau,"
and he answered him saying, “Master, a fever hath
seized me," And Rabban replied, saying, "I trust in our
Lord that if the fever hath seized thee in very truth,
I. e., Cyriacus.
something to lie upon, a bed. Compare ✓ Payne
Smith, Thes., col. 745.
<pb n="429"/>
He will visit thee and heal thee by the prayers of Rabban
Jacob; but if thou hast spoken contrary [to the truth],
may a mighty fever come upon thee;" and he left him
and departed. And the old man who told me this
thing asseverated with oaths that Khusrau began at
once to cry out and to shriek and to beat upon his head
with his hands like a man who was [actually] afflicted,
and his life was near to be destroyed if we had not
run and besought forgiveness for him from the holy
man, who sent him a "mercy" ("), and straightway he
was relieved.
And after this there was set apart for his service
Jacob bar-Bábhânósh,' who was surnamed "the sacris-
tan's son," with whom I was also contemporary for
many years, and [Rabban] knew beforehand that he
I would not be an upright man, and every time that he
saw him he was pointing him out with his finger to
those round about him, and saying, "This Jacob bar-
Bâbhânôsh hath broken the yoke and cut the ropes
which tied it upon his neck,"³ and thus also did we
know him. I have also heard concerning him from the
aged men, that he neither drew near to the laborious
life of asceticism, nor embraced it. And in the time
of his old age when the "sacristan's son" was forced
to celebrate the sacrament standing by the priest in
e., Bab- Pâp + anôsh (cf. Anôsh-ravân) "having
a blessed father."
After this word we should probably add a “the son
of the sacristan;" compare 1. 16 (text).
3 The allusion is to Jeremiah xxx. 8. N
The wooden portion of the yoke is called
"little goat" the two ropes are tied to it, one at each end,
and fastened under the neck.
<pb n="430"/>the capacity of a deacon'-now he used to sit [basking]
in the portico of the nave of the church the whole
day and when he went in to celebrate, and the wafers
were laid in the paten³ upon the altar, he used to steal.
some of them and place [them] in his bosom; and thus
he did many times until at last we perceived him. And
from every cell into which he entered-for every man
used to invite [him] in to rest himself, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="228"/> taking pity on
his old age-if its master* went away a short distance
from before him he took something, and placed it in
his bosom; and in this manner of life he died.
Rabban Isho-yahbh, who was surnamed the 'Long',
also related to me that there lived in this monastery a
certain solitary named Rabban Sergius, an old man and
the head of the ministration,' with whom also I was
contemporary. And it came to pass one day that this
old man met Rabban Cyriacus as he was going into
the colonnade from the temple, and as he himself was
* "Unless a priest has a Shammàshâ, i. e., a deacon or assis-
tant . . . . . to serve with him, the Liturgy cannot be cele-
brated." Badger, Nestorians, ii. 19.
2 -σoά, which, however, I believe we should here
render aisle.
3 also "the table of the sacrament;" see Badger, Nes-
torians, ii. p. 239, 1. 3. This seems to be the meaning of
on p. 218, l. 1 (text), where we read that Mâr Cyriacus only
drank wine when he was obliged to do so in receiving the sacra-
ment with the other brethren. Compare also the use of the
word in Liturgia Sanctorum Apostolorum Adaei et Maris, Urmia,
1890, 4to., p. 6, l. 10; p. 23, 1. 22; p. 24, ll. 8, 13; and p. 28, l. 14.
* I. e., the occupier of the cell.
ipxnduárovog? ? or perhaps the monk who led — ܪܫ ܬܫܡܫܬܐ 3
the service.
6
-еpiσTulov (Payne Smith, Thes., col. 480),
and it seems, therefore, that by this word we should here under-
<pb n="431"/>
going into the temple from the colonnade, and that
they met one another in the place of the watchers."
And although Sergius was a holy man, yet through
the working of Satan he said to Rabban Cyriacus, "I
would rather that Satan had met me than thou." Rabban
said to him, "Now I hope in our Lord that Satan will
stand "portico" or лроσтŵov (for a description of such a
portico see Badger, Nestorians, vol. I, p. 94). It is not pro-
.ܐܣܛܘܐ ܝܟܠܐ ܚ ܒܝܬ ܐܤܛܬܢܐ bable that
125, i. c.,
was sung by the
the place where the office for the night.
or Dewpoì. For the duties of these men
see B. O., iii. 2, p. 820ff. Judging from the details given by
Thomas of Margâ concerning the church used by the monks,
the general arrangement of the main portions of the building
Imust have been as shown in the following rough plan:-
ܡܕܒܣܐ
pnua( ܩܝܡܐ
ܩܣܛܪܘܡܐ
κρηπίς
ναός
43
πρόναος
προστῷον
-
=2&\0? (??)
ܒܝܬ ܗܪܐ
ܒܝܬ ܐܣܛܘܢ̈ܐ
e., кóτXN
ἐσωνάρθηξ
ἐξωνάρθηξ
οι περίστυλον
The altar stood in the 200
(see supra, p. 342), or space above the
three steps, and a path led through the axe, or choir, to the; the
40, i. e., opaктǹ, or altar-screen with its veils, stood either
in the middle or at the door of the above the steps lead-
ing down into the nave of the church. For the various parts
<pb n="432"/>enter into thee, and that thou wilt never be rid of him
until the grave." And Rabban Isho'-yahbh swore to
me that straightway Satan smote him in the place of
the watchers, and tore off his skin from him by jerking
him along upon the walls,' until the monks went in to
him by reason of the noise of his cries. And it was
thus until the end of his life, and even when he stood
up in the service in the temple leaning upon his staff,
fifty years after Rabban had cursed him, he was afflicted
as he stood, and he foamed, and his spittle came out
[of his mouth] and ran down upon his beard; and al-
though he was an upright man until his death, according
to the word of the holy man concerning him, he found
no rest.
And a certain evil and ill-natured Arab who was
passing from the mountains to the city came to this
monastery with a large company of followers, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="229"/>
and he had with him a hunting dog which he had
brought with him as a gift for one of the chiefs who
were his superiors; and having tied him up in the
of the church symbolically treated see Book V. chap. 15, (text
p. 306); and also Du Cange, Glossarium, s. v. кpηπis (col. 754),
νάρθηξ (col. 986), κατηχούμενα (col. 621), ναός (col. 985),
лрóvαos (col. 1245); Waddington, Inscriptions of Syria, No. 2218,
Ἐκτίση ἡ κρηπὶς καὶ ἡ κόγκ[η του] θεοῦ quoted also by Gralian,
Trans. Roy. Soc. Lit., vol. VI. p. 282.
* All the MSS have 5, but read walls. See Hoff-
mann, Syr. Arab. Gloss., No. 2764, p. 98.
2 Probably a fine specimen of the greyhound family. To
this day in and around Môşul these dogs are much used for
hunting purposes, but I regret to say that when they become
old the natives turn them out to starve in the streets or to be
worried to death by the young and vigorous pariah dogs. They
are often taken to Bagdad as gifts for Pashas.
<pb n="433"/>
outer martyrium³ by some chance or other the dog
died. And when it was morning, and [the Arab] saw
that his dog was dead, he was greatly grieved, and
he began to abuse and to threaten the monks, and also
to demand from them the price of the dog, saying,
"Ye have killed him." And when the monks had gone
in for necessary purposes, and the Arab was still threat-
ening them, and his striving was becoming more violent,
they went to the cell of Rabban, and informed him of
the matter. And he took the abbot's staff and came,
and when he went in and saw the Arab he said to
him, "Why art thou thus enraged," and why dost thou
threaten us?" And the Arab said, “Because ye have
killed the dog which I brought [with me] with such
Rabban said to him, "Now if thy dog
be not dead thou wilt ask nothing from us?" And the
Arab said, "God forbid that I should importune you in
anything." And the blessed old man asked for the dog,
and they shewed him to him lying outside; and he
said to the Arab, "Thy dog is not dead; rise up, and
do thou and thy companions mount your animals, and
I will wake up thy dog and he shall go with thee."
And when the Arab had mounted Rabban went and
pricked the dog with the top of his staff, saying, "Rise
up, dead dog, and die outside of our territory;" and
straightway the dog stood up. And all those Arabs
saw and marvelled, and they threw a bark-rope³ over
him, and took him away and when he came to the
great trouble."
* 7. e., the martyrium outside the church proper.
.ܕܥܘܡܐ for ܠܥܘܡܐ
3. Compare
a
corde pour mener les chiens,
Dozy, Supplement, t. 1, p. 672, col. 1.
iii
<pb n="434"/>Edhrê dhe Bâlâs' the dog died. Thus those men went
away having harmed [us] in nothing.
One year when the wheat [which was] the property
of the monastery was being brought from Bêth Ziwa,
and by reason of the heat [of the day] the overseers
were urging the labourers to get up to work in the
morning while it was yet dark, they complained, saying,
"There is a lion in the reedy swamp,' and we are
afraid to go forth by night because of him." <pb type="textAllignment"  n="230"/>
And when the blessed man learned [this], he took his
staff and went on foot before them, and behold they
came to the head of the reedy swamp, and the lion
himself was there. And the holy man answered and
said to him, "In the name of our Lord Jesus, to Whom
all things are subject, mayest thou never be found here
[again]; if I see thee here another day I will smote thee
with hard blows." And he answered and said to the
labourers, "From henceforth fear not, and walk hither
by day and by night freely;" and it came to pass ac-
cording to the word of the holy man, and during all
that time that lion was never seen there. Now these
things were related to me by the old man Ḥěnân-Åshö
who was surnamed the "Red".
This man also related to me that there was a certain
widow from the village of Tidôr, and that [one day]
she was collecting the scattered ears after the reapers
with her young son; now this lad was her only son.
of
* I. c., "the threshingfloor of Bâlâs." For other examples
with proper names, see Payne Smith, Thes., col. 41.
Sol, a word explained by marshy land by the side
see Hoffmann, Syr. Arab. Gloss., No. 357,
p. 17; Duval, Lexicon, col. 78; Payne Smith, Thes., col. 79.
اوسكة of a river, and
<pb n="435"/>
And it came to pass that the boy fell down suddenly
in the field by reason of an evil spirit which had
seized him in his heart, and he died, and [his sad case]
moved every one to weep for him. And the monks
who were reaping counselled her, saying, “If thou wilt
take him to the monastery, to the head of the mon-
astery, he will make thy son to live again." And she
lifted up her son upon an ass before her, and she went
along quickly and laid him at the door of the abbot's
cell, in which the blessed man was at that moment,
and she began to weep dolefully, and to call him by
his name, and to adjure [him], saying, "O Father
Cyriacus, have mercy upon [me] a wretched woman,
have mercy on the stranger," for the root³ from which
life was extended for me has been cut off from me
like a dried up tree. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="231"/> ○ spare the woman
who looketh [for help] to the hope of thy prayer, and
turn not away thy face from me, that He also may
not turn His face away from thy petition in the hour
when thou knockest at His door. Be thou sorrowful
for the wretched old widow, for there is no life for
me now that the light of my eyes, and the breath of
my life, and the touching of my hands, and the steps
of my feet, and the maintenance and protector of my
life [hath departed]. By that power which cleaveth to
thee, if thou entreatest Him for the life of my son He
will give it back to thee. Let thy mercy be revealed,
Read
* See Payne Smith, Thes., col. 2806.
وريد 17 وفا طبقه 3
see the examples in Payne Smith, Thes.,
col. 1069.
+ Read 3.
<pb n="436"/>and listen to my voice, even as thy Lord, Who heark-
ened to the Canaanitish' woman, and to Whom the
sin of the harlot was not an abominable thing." Now
while the woman was at the door and was making
use of such [words] as these, and was at the same time
crying and weeping with plaintive lamentation, he had
no monk from the monastery with him at that time, and
he himself opened the door and saw the dead body
of her son, and she herself was sitting crying before
it. And he answered and said to her, "What have I
to do with thee, O woman, and what have I in my
hands wherewith to help thee?" And he took her son
´ and brought him unto his cell, and when he had re-
mained a long time in prayer and supplication, the Lord
gave to the holy man the soul of that child; and he
gave him back to his mother alive, and she took him
with great joy and praise, and returned to the field.
And this [miracle] was proclaimed throughout all the
country. And it also happened to that blessed man
by the hand of God that it was not³ necessary for him.
to work his miracles openly, and [therefore] he hid
himself being afraid of vainglory, and he plucked out
this foul affection from the dross of his thoughts, and
cast it far, far away. Now although a short way back
I said that the Lord honoured this holy man, so that
before and after him there was none like unto him,
there are nevertheless other [saints], and I did not
make this decision in respect of all men, nor did I by
any means intend it to include all the saints; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="232"/>
I only intended to say that by reason of the miracles
* St. Matthew xv. 22.
2 St. Luke vii. 36-50.
.ܓܘ ܕܗܒܐ read ܠܘ ܕܗܒܐ For 4
.ܕܠܐ read ܒܠܐ For 3
<pb n="437"/>
which took place at his hands he was superior to all
who lived in his time in this monastery. And if thy
mind, [O 'Abhd-Isho] will hearken unto my argument
it shall be convinced [of this fact].
And there was in this monastery one of the elders
who was surnamed Solomon bar-Sabhĕthâ, who was a
spectator of the miracle which we are about to relate;
now the account of [this miracle] was handed down
from his mouth to us, for we never knew this man in
this life. And he used to relate [it] to all those from
whom I have heard it, saying, "When Rabban Cyriacus
was the head of the monastery, I was the steward. And
when the commemoration of Rabban Jacob' came, he
gathered together the twenty-two schools of Margå,
[concerning] which also Már Abraham the Catholicus,
of holy memory, and blessed in all things, said to me,
'There existed in Margå at that time, and flourished a
great congregation, without number.' And I, Solomon,
say that when I saw that the multitudes were very
great I was afraid to give out wine in abundance in
the butler's closet' according to custom; now Rabban
himself was sitting with the butlers and those who laid
the tables. And when the monks in the monastery
came to me to the wine cellar,³ and I had given them
wine to carry away once, and again a second time,
* His commemoration took place on a Friday in November.
See Wright, Catalogue of Syr. MSS., p. 187, No. 152.
* i. e., "the place of those who lay the tables."
Hoffmann translates Baby Tafeldecker, compare στpun,
στράτωρ and τραπεζάρης (Du Cange, Glossarium, col. 1598).
See Hoffmann, Verhandlungen der Kirchenversammlung zu
Ephesus. pp. 67, 99 (note 304, col. 2).
3.
<pb n="438"/>they came yet a third time by the command of Rabban.
And I sent him [a message], saying, 'Spare the wine a
little, for if thou givest' it out thus abundantly to-day
thou wilt be without wine for the vigil of to-morrow.'
And when the blessed man heard this, behold he blazed
like a furnace, and he came to me to the wine cellar,
and said, 'My son, why hast thou not sent wine?' And
I said to him, 'Master, I was afraid lest it would not
hold out even for the table of the Mysteries to-morrow.
Be sparing then, for we have [to celebrate] another
vigil for the dead,³ and behold, there is gathered to-
gether to us an assembly the like of which [for mag-
nitude] we have never seen in this monastery. And
he answered and said to me, 'While I go and give
permission for the multitudes to begin [to sing] psalms,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="233"/> do thou make ready eight mules and skin
bottles and bags, for I have heard that there is a
caravan of Hirthâyê* at the place of the crossing, at
ܡܬܪܬܚܝܢ after ܐܢܬܘܢ We should probably add 1
2 in Neo-Syriac "church festival." For the description
of the or "festival of 'Âdhâ" (a village situated near
Supurgan, four hours north of Urmî), see Socin, Die Neu-
Aramaeischen Dialekte von Urmia bis Mosul, Tübingen, 1882,
pp. 84, 172, notes 14 and 189.
3 The "Friday of the Dead" fell a little before
Lent; see Wright, Catalogue of Syriac MSS., p. 183, no. 34;
B. O., . ii. p. 382, No. 28 (4
sweis). For
a description of the festival for the commemoration of the dead
now in use among the Nestorians see Badger, Nestorians, vol. I,
p. 229. The was celebrated in that part of the church
called, into which, on solemn occasions, the laity were
admitted.
4 I. e., people of Hirthâ, a place the ruins of which still.
exist to the south-east of Meshed 'Alî, but it seems hardly
<pb n="439"/>
Estwân, that we may go and obtain wine from them.
And when, by the hand of God, we have celebrated
the festival which standeth [at hand], we will bring
wine and pay them back'; and he left me and went
to the temple, as I was wondering and amazed at his
words. And because we had experience of him in all
things, I accounted this [thing] likewise as one of his
many glorious acts, and I did according to his word
which never failed. And I took two soldiers' with
me, and [Rabban] went before us along the road which
goeth to the Zâbhâ [Zâb], and although he was on
foot in front of us and we were riding we did not
overtake him. And when we arrived at the appointed
place by the Zâb he asked me, 'Have ye brought with
you any earthenware vessel?' and I said to him, 'Why
do we want such a thing?" He said to me, That we
might borrow the wine through it, and pay it back
through it.' Now the vessel which he asked for [was
that] with which we used to fill the skin bottles from
the Zâb. And when we came to the water he said
to me, 'Tarry here with thy companions, for I am going
to see if that caravan is still there;' and when we had
been sitting by the Zâb some time, behold the blessed
man came to us, and there breathed forth from him
likely that a caravan going from Kûfa and Bagdad to Âdhôrbâî-
gån by way of Arbela would cross the Zâb and make a circuit
by Mosul. On the other hand a local caravan from Ḥedhattâ
would cross the Zâb pretty soon and make its way into Margâ.
For, then, we should probably read, to which the
readings of BC point.
"A village on the Zâb;" see Bk. 1. chap. 24, supra, p. 84
(text p. 48, 1. 12).
2 For 2, read
<pb n="440"/>an odour which surpassed all scents, and fear and
wonder fell upon us. And he answered, like one in
distress and said to me, 'My son, according to what I
have learned, those men passed by last evening and
have gone away; but that our journey may not be in
vain, fill the bottles from the Zâb and let us go [home];'
and we did according to his word. Now the villagers
who were with me began to laugh secretly, saying,
'Instead of wine we shall take water, which is much
cooler than that of the monastery, for the blessed men.'
And while he was walking on before us we were laugh-
ing over the water which we were carrying with so
much care, and when we came to the monastery he said
to me, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="234"/> Take the loads into the wine cellar, and
take heed unto them.' And we left [him], and he went
to the temple, and I dismissed the villagers also from
my presence. And I pondered that it could not be
by accident and for nothing that so great a man as
this, a man who knew the secrets of [all] hearts, who
brought the dead to life, and who had done and still
doeth other marvellous deeds, was moved to bring
water from the Zâb; and I rose up and lit a lamp,
and I opened the ear of one of the bottles, and behold
there breathed forth the smell of wine, the like of
which he used to say, "before our Lord, I never smelt
from any other wine." And I praised and glorified the
might of Christ, Who had given the power and the
promise to His disciples that they should work miracles
even as He did;' and I also determined that I would
not reveal the matter to any man, and that I would
not give out this wine to be drunk, either to-day or
St. John xiv. 12, 13.
<pb n="441"/>
to-morrow, until this old' wine which we had brought
from the mountain should be finished. Now when the
service of the Mysteries was ended, and every one had
gone into the common-room of the brethren, Rabban
sent to me, saying, 'Bring into the common-room some
of that good wine which thou hast, and give up the
intention which thou didst decide upon during the night'.
And at this [speech] also I was the more moved to
the praise of God the Lord of all, in that Rabban could
see beforehand and know by the eye of the Spirit
even the motions' of the thoughts of my mind."
Now it came to pass one year that Rabban himself
Iwas obliged to carry the imperial³ tax which was due
from this monastery to Yazdinbadh, a village of Margå,
and taking with him one of the monks in the mon-
astery they both departed. And while the blessed old
man, by reason of his age and feebleness, was riding
upon an ass, and the monk was marching behind, the
monk meditated the following thought:-"The head of
the monastery hath not done well in carrying with
him all this money to the government without five
other men coming with us; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="235"/> alas for the evil-
ness of the times, and alas for thieves! Peradventure¨
we shall meet with some opposition which we shall
not be able to stand against." And that holy man
turned, and looked at the monk, and said to him,
"Why art thou doubtful about the hidden protector
who is with us, my son, just as if the providence of
.ܩܕܡܝܐ Read -
motions of the mind, germinations of thought.
3 Compare St. Matthew xxii. 17.
4 Spelt also see text p. 386, 1. 16.
kkk
<pb n="442"/>God cometh by accident? March on in confidence in
God the Lord of all, and fear not;" thus pure and
clear was the hidden eye of the understanding of that
holy man.
.
CHAPTER XX.
OF THE REVELATIONS WHICH THAT HOLY MAN RECEIVED
WHEN HE WAS WITH THE WHOLE CONGREGATION IN THE
REFECTORY."
Since now [this] ascetic³ had become like unto an
altar of prayer, and with his secret, inner man his mind
had burned [upon it] ceaselessly the incense of psalms
and hymns of praise to the exalted Godhead,—like
the Watchers (2. e., Angels) on high whose chain of
praises before the throne of Godhead is never sever-
ed, like the spiritual powers he became wise and
understanding, by the revelations which were hovering
round about him abundantly, and he saw things which
were afar off, 3 and prophesied concerning things which
were about to happen, even as the blessed Evagrius,
[who] comparing the sight of the understanding with
the ܒܝܬ ܐ:ܐ or refectory, to be distinguished from ܒܝܬ ܥܒܕܐ -
common-room of the brethren. The 25x Ag seems to have been
joined to the kitchen or place where the food was cooked
(μarεipеîov); compared
(text p. 236,
1. 2). The (Land, Anecdota, tom. ii. p. 196, 1. 22; p. 196,
1. 16;) may be compared to the εẞdoµadápio who had certain
duties which lasted a week assigned to them in monasteries.
See Du Cange, Glossarium, col. 339.
Anecdota, t. ii. p. 207, 1. 24.
I. e., Mâr Cyriacus.
For
3 Read.
see Land,
<pb n="443"/>
the Cherubim spake, saying, "He that hath many eyes,
perceiveth spiritually much, and is enlightened on all
sides, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="236"/> and abideth without shadow."
Now on the day before the commemoration of the
holy Mar Jacob, in which all the brethren were accus-
tomed to bake bread in the refectory, and to celebrate
this night with psalms and spiritual praises, when they
came [to the verse] "I will sing of the goodness of
the Lord for ever, and His belief' shall be in my mouth
from generation to generation," the mind of the holy
man was carried away as though by some spiritual
vision. And it appeared to him in the spirit as though
he were not in the refectory, but in this holy temple,³
and he saw that of the monks, old and young, who
were there with him, two and forty persons were chosen,
and in his hearing the words, "The Grace of the Lord,"
which are usually sung on the Festivals of the Lord,
were changed into those which
.ܐܘܕܥ ܗܝܡܢܘܬܗ The Peshitta has 1
are sung to a
2 Psalm lxxxix. 1.
•
3 I. c., the temple of Bêth 'Abhê.
Literally, "which are said."
4
5 Thomas of Margâ means that he heard "the Grace of the
Lord" sung to a tune (✓) which was different (as) from that
to which it was usually sung upon festivals relating to our
Lord. On
see B. O., iii. 1. p. 529, col. 2, 1 23.
"The Grace of the Lord" occurs in the service for festivals
relating to our Lord, and also in the service for the Conse-
cration of Bishops, but the wording of each "Grace" is different.
For the "Grace" at the Consecration of Bishops see Badger,
Nestorians, vol. ii. p. 344; B. O., iii. ii. p. 685, col. 2; and for
the ordinary "Grace" see Badger, Nestorians, vol. ii. p. 222.
The verb refers to the tune, and the change in the tune
reminded him of the "Grace" in the festivals relating to our
Lord. Hymns with changes of tune in them were called
x
<pb n="444"/>different tune at the consecration of Bishops at the
moment when the hands are laid upon them; and
he saw that there were given to them from the sanc-
tuary white turbans and staves of the laying on of
hands. Now while he was being led away by such a
vision and was carried away by this divine sight, the
ascetics saw that his face was clothed at that moment
with the light of glory, and they knew that a Divine
visitation had united itself to his understanding. And
when he had returned to himself and had come down
from that sublimity, he sighed a deep sigh while he
was yet shining with the glory of the Divine nature; and
although they wished to ask him a question or to
draw nigh to him, yet because of this they feared, and
refrained from him. And when they had proceeded with
the service of the parts of the Psalms called Hullâlê,*
and with the different hymns³ which were sung between
the Psalms, they went on with the Psalter, and came
to [the verse], "Lord, remember David and all his
humility," again another revelation shone upon the
blessed man; and when he came to himself again from
the vision, and knew where he was, he was sorrowful,
and shed tears, and sighed very bitterly. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="237"/> And
; see Wright, Catalogue Syr. MSS., p. 376, col. 2; and
ܫܘܚܠܦܐ,1.6 ,B. O., iii. 1, p. 284, col. x and ;(ܩܠܐ ܒܬܪ ܩܠܐ ܥܡ)
.B. 0., iii. i ܘܐܦܝܣܩܘܦܐ ܟܕ ܡܨܒܬܝܢ ܒܒܝܪ̈ܘܢܐ ܘܒܚܘܛܢ̈ܐ Compare
Du Cange, Glossarium, s. v. Eipμóc, col. 356.
p. 685, col. 2, 1. 13.
2 See Badger, Nestorians, vol. ii. p. 17.
3 See B. O., iii. I, p. 530, chaps. 5, 6 (
and B. O., iii. ii. p. 669, col. 2
prop?
(300 se
* Psalm cxxxii. I, in the Peshitta, cxxxi.
laxas aww);
No box boxxo)
<pb n="445"/>
.
when the service of the refectory' was over, and each
Iman had gone to his cell, at mid-day, according to
custom, the brethren went in to the refectory,* and that
holy old man was at their head like the moon sur-
rounded by stars. And he answered and said to them,
"Did ye then, beloved, see me last night while these
things happened to me?" They said to him, "Yes,
master, we have seen that two visitations happened to
thee, but what these visitations which happened to thee
[portended] we know not; and now we ask thee to
shew us." And again he answered and said to them,
"In the first vision I saw that two and forty men be-
longing to this congregation here present, old men,
middle-aged, and young men, were set apart [to be]
governors of the Holy Church; some of them Patriarchs,
some of them Metropolitans, and some of them Bishops.
And also in the second vision it was shewn to me that
from the glorious position in which this monastery now
standeth, flourishing with teachers, and expositors, and
sages, and wise and understanding men, it shall be
brought low, and abased, and humbled in everything
in which it excelleth, more particularly in respect of
A.
2 Vat. reads "the brethren went into the refectory," and the
other MSS. "the brethren went in to table;" compare Land,
Anecdota, t. ii. p. 243, L. 2, for a proof that the A and SAS
were united (0) 2007 And so 170). For the service
of hymns to be chanted at meal-times, see Wright, Catalogue
Syr. MSS., p. 372, col. 2, No. 20.
3 In the Syriac version of Pseudo-Callisthenes
μεσ; see Budge, History of Alexander the Great, p. 10,
1 17; p. 14, 1.15; p. 16, 1. 5; the fem. As occurs on
p. 209, 1. 13.
<pb n="446"/>teachers, until the time cometh in which [the monks]
shall be obliged to hire directors for the vigils, and
[men] to carry out for them the musical parts of the
service, and to correct and set in order the tunes
having refrains which are sung to the psalms and
hymns." These are the things which were foretold by
that blessed man, and I was a spectator, and was in
the midst of the whole matter, being a neighbour, and
one who gave encouraging advice. And it came to
pass at one time that [this monastery] was obliged to
hire the much enlightened³ man, Solomon of Beth
Garmai (Garměkâyâ), who was surnamed Mahdi,' to
teach all the brethren who needed it [firstly,] how to
read the service-books, and how to sing the hymns
and responses, and secondly, how to sing the book of
hymns of consolation' which they were wont to sing
" vigil, excubitor, apud Syros Nestorianos vocatur, qui
nocturno praesertim officio decantando praeest" B. O., iii. ii.
p. 820.
.the art of singing correctly and in tune — ܩܝܡܘܬ ܩܠܐ ܚ ܩܝܡܘܬܐ -
3. ., melodies with a refrain to which different words
are sung each time it is repeated. See supra, Bk. iii. chap. I.
p. 291, note 3 (text p. 142, l. 5).
* The rest of this chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. i, p. 488,.
coll. I, 2.
5 means doctissimus, and also blin
_ \; see Wright, Catalogue of Syr. MSS., p. 162, col. 2.
.ܐܢܫ ܗܟܝܠ We should read 6
مَهْدِى .
7
8 Compares par B. O., iii. ii. p. 939, 1. 18; parti
23 as ibid. 1. 20.
9 Assemâni omits me. We should, however,
read Box az.
<pb n="447"/>
at the vigil of the dead;' and also to bring the much
enlightened Baûth' to our monastery for the same
purpose.
And as regards the Bishops <pb type="textAllignment"  n="238"/> of whom the
old man said that there should be two and forty, I will
write down without delay the names both of those
whom I myself saw, and of those which I learned from
others, who were among that blessed congregation and
who also were selected for consecration one after the
other. Firstly we will honour the holy person, the prophet
and seer concerning whom is our discourse, Rabban
Cyriacus³ who was elected Bishop of the city of Baládh,
as we shall shew at the end [of the book]; * Rabban
George the Metropolitan was elected Bishop of Elam,
and afterwards Patriarch; Mâr Abraham was elected
Bishop of Hadhattâ and afterwards Patriarch; Mår
Kardagh, Mâr Shubhḥal-Isho', and Mår Yahbh-lâha were
elected Metropolitans of Gilân' and 'of Dailôm;6 and
Thomas from Ḥědhôdh,' Zacchaeus from Bêth Mûlê,*
and Shêm bar-Arlâyê,' and Ephraim, and Simon, and
Ananias and David who went with them from this
* For hymns to be sung at Vigils for the Dead see Wright,
Catalogue Syr. MSS., p. 367, col. 2, No. 3; p. 370, col. 1, No. 4.
• A Monastery of Ba'ûth, existed near Bâlâdh;
see B. O., iii. i, p. 557, col. I, last line.
3 Read.
4 See Book V. chap. 14 (text. p. 302, 1. 4).
5 See supra, p. 220.
7 See supra, p. 68.
6 See supra, p. 220.
8 I. e., Mill-house. Assemâni has
p
9 Bar-Arlayê is probably a nickname meaning "son of a
giant," and is derived from ✓✓i, Heb.
(Isaiah xxix. 1.);
see Payne Smith, Thes., col. 379; Duval, Lexicon, col. 289;
Hoffmann, Syr. Arab. Gloss., No. 1486, p. 52.
<pb n="448"/>monastery were elected and consecrated Bishops of
those countries. Mâr Eliya, whose history we are
about to write, was elected Bishop of Mûķân, David'
was elected to be Metropolitan of Bêth Şînâyê³—now
I have learned concerning this man from the Epistles
of Mâr Timothy+-together with Peter his disciple,
who was alive and held the office of Bishop of the
country of Yâmân³ and of Ṣan'a when I was secretary
to Mâr Abraham; Isho-zěkhâ was elected Metropolitan
Bishop of Karkhâ-dhe-Beth-Slökh;' Bûrd-isho, and
Cyriacus, and Bâbhai, and this isho who came to
Margâ, all these were elected Bishops of Bêth Garmai;
2. c., was situated near Gilân (see supra, p. 220)
in Armenia and Adhôrbâîgân. See MacGuckin de Slane,
وموقان في نهاية بلاد كيلان 400 .Geographie d Aboulfeda, p
ill); Yâķût, tom. iii. p. 420; and De Goeje, Bibl.
Geog. Arab., p. 17, L. 8; p. 119, l. 16; p. 120, l. 15; p. 213,
1. 7. The modern form of the name is ... Moghân is a
steppe in the corner between the right bank of the Lower
Arras and the right bank of the Kurr. The town seems to
have been situated near Mount Heshtâ[d]-sar, to the N. W. of
Mount Tabhalân, and the town of Berzend, near the left bank
of the Kara-Su in Angatieft towards the hill country. See Ritter,
Erdkunde, t. viii. p. 662; t. ix. pp. 793, 796, 870.
* The rest of this chapter is also quoted in B. O., iii. i,
p. 163. col. 1.
3. I. e., China.
ܤܐܝܬ ܠܗ ܐܝܟ ܡܐܬܝܢ ܐܓܪܢ ܕܒܬܪܬܝܢ ܢܢܩܝܢ Abhd Ishó says of him ܀
6
; see B. O., iii. i. p. 163.
I. e.,, see Yâķût, tom. iv. p. 1034f.
• i. c., state the ancient capital of Yemen. For Arabic
descriptions of town see MacGuckin de Slane, Géographie
d'Aboulfeda, p. 95; Voyages d'ibn Batoutah, (ed. Defrémery et
Sanguinetti) tom. ii. p. 176; and Yâķût, tom. iv. p. 420.
7 I. e., Kerkuk; see supra, p. 122.
<pb n="449"/>
Isho', who was surnamed Mâran-zěkhâ, was elected
Bishop of Shoshan," the city that is in Elam; Rabban
Diodorus and 'Abd-isho were elected Bishops of Beth
Bĕghâsh, one after the other; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="239"/> Lazarus, Gabriel,
and Jacob, these three were elected Bishops of Mârgâ;
Cyriacus of Awakh* was elected Bishop of Nineveh; Mår
Narsai, concerning whom also our discourse is prepared
to praise, was elected Bishop of Shennâ;³ and Elisha
and George were elected Bishops of Khânîshâbhôr,*
that is Beth Wâzîk.³ Now [the names of] the others
by reason of the remoteness of the time have not been
handed down to me by tradition, and inasmuch as I
did not know that I should become the historian' of
the glorious deeds of the holy man I did not enquire
beforehand concerning them from the old men who
related to me the accounts of his actions.
Compare "Shushan the palace", Nehemiah i. 1; Esther ii. 8.
2 For read; for 501 or 501 see Bk. ii. chap. 34
(text p. 115, 1. 11), and see supra, p. 250.
37. e., Sinn Bârimmâ-Shennâ dhe Bhêth Remman-Kâr-
dâlîâbhâdh, a place ten farsaḥ distant from Tekrît, on the east
bank of the Tigris. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 189.
* A town situated on the west bank of the Little Zâb just
above where this river falls into the Tigris; see Hoffmann, Aus-
züge, p. 189. he is the Persian name of al-Bawâzîk
"La signification serait soit 'musique pour (l'oreille de) Sâbour'
quand on lui parle de la ville, soit 'cantatio Saporis' dans le
sens de laus Saporis cantibus celebrata"". See De Goeje, Bibl.
Geog. Arab., t. vi. p. 68, note 1, and p. 94 (text).
5 I. e., al-Bawâzik.
6
111
<pb n="450"/>CHAPTER XXI.
OF THE COMING IN OF AMRAN BAR-MUHAMMAD' TO THIS
COUNTRY [OF MARGA], AND OF HOW HAVING SEIZED MANY
ESTATES AND SLAIN THEIR OWNERS, HE WISHED ALSO TO
KILL THE HOLY MAN [CYRIACUS] AND TO INHERIT THIS
MONASTERY.
And there was a certain troublesome Ishmaelite
whose name was ‘Amran bar-Muḥammad, concerning
whom I have also written in the history of Rabban
Gabriel, and he was a harsh, violent, and pitiless man,
and a murderer. Now upon [his] coming into this
country from Bêth Bôzâi,³ he began to slay its inhabi-
tants, and to take possession of the province of Bîrtâ,
and of Helaphtâ, and Ḥetrâ, and Bâshôsh, and Ḥerpâ,
villages of Saphsâphâ,+ and little by little of many
others. And he determined to take possession of the
estates of this holy monastery, [and he would have
done so] if this holy father [Mâr Cyriacus] had not
stood in our breaches and fenced up our paths against
his harmful acts, as did the blessed Moses, and Joshua
and David in their times. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="240"/> And when he made
are بنی عمران The Band Imran عمران بن مُحَمَّد . . .
mentioned by Ibn Ḥaukal as
and settled in Kurdistan.
being a branch of the Azd tribe
See De Goeje, Bibl. Geog. Arab.,
Pars ii. p. 144, l. 9; Ibn al-Athir, tom. vii. p. 117, 1. 13; and
Hoffinann, Auszüge, p. 234 and note 1867.
2 See Book vi. chap. 16.
3. e., the "house of Bôzâi."
This name appears to have
been formed originally from the Persian bôzîd; conf. Yêzdbôzedh,
Horn-Steindorff, Sassanidische Siegelsteine, p. 36. For the
situation of Bêth Bôzài see Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 196.
* See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 223ff.
5 Compare Psalm cvi. 23.
<pb n="451"/>
his coming to this monastery and would have com-
pelled all the brethren to sign a deed selling the monas-
tery and its estates to him, the blessed old man stood
up valiantly before him, and reproached him, and made
him despicable through the rebukes of his words, and
by the abundance of his demonstrations, saying, "I
affirm and I swear' by the hope of the Christians, ◎
'Amran bar-Muḥammad, that this monastery shall never
belong to thee, nor to thy sons, nor to thy grandsons.
Behold all the land is before thee, get thee away from
this holy house, for as the Lord liveth, if thou departest
[from it], it will be much the better for thee, and thou
wilt do great good unto thyself; but if thou darest
to seek to enter the monastery by the might of thy
threats, thou shalt very soon eat the bitterness of the
reward of thy evil deeds. Behold I have warned thee,
and behold I have advised thee for good; get thee
forth from our monastery and it shall be well with
thee, lest thou go quickly to the house of the dead.
And know this also: because of all the blood of the
believers which thou hast poured out, and the wretched
people whom thou hast slain and whose houses thou
hast seized, it is written with an iron style on a
shamir stone in the record chamber of the justice of
God. And this shall be to thee the sign; when thou
diest, the earth from which thou wast taken and to
which thou shouldst return shall not receive thee, but
thy body shall be cast forth, and the Evil One will
not accept thy body." Now when by all this might
of trust in divine providence, and by the fervidness
For in swearing an oath see supra, p. 410.
with a pen of" בְּעַט בַּרְזֶל בְּצִפּרָן שָׁמִיר The allusion is to :
iron, and with the claw of a diamond," Jeremiah xvii. 1.
<pb n="452"/>of his temperament, and by the sharpness of his tongue
he had put Amran to shame, 'Amran rose up wrath-
fully and went to Ḥelaphtâ having the evil [intention]
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="241"/> in his heart to send secretly and slay the holy
man. And when 'Amran had gone, and [the blessed
man] saw that the monks were terrified and afraid of
his threats, he said to them, "Fear not, ○ blessed
brethren, his words, nor any stumbling-block which
he can put in our way, for this monastery shall
be for ever and ever preserved from this man and
from all his posterity; let no man be afraid that 'Am-
ran will send here to slay any one, for, on the con-
trary, he hath made up his mind to flatter you. And
behold he will shortly send for some of you, therefore
go with him readily and be not afraid, for I will go
forth with you, and I will pour into his ears things
mightier than those which ye have [already] heard."
Now when a few days had passed by 'Amran sent
ten horsemen for certain of the old men' of the con-
gregation. And when they beat the board' for as-
sembling the monks and they were all gathered
together, all the brethren were afflicted through fear,
because [the horsemen] would not allow the holy old
man to go with the [other] old men his companions,
saying, "We are not commanded to bring Rabban
Cyriacus with us." Now when [the holy man] saw that
the brethren were in despair and undone, he drew
them aside, and said to them, "Be not afraid to go,
for when ye shall enter into the presence of 'Amran ye
2
* I. e., certain of the whom he specified by name.
A picture of the board which is beaten to call the monks
together in Greek monasteries is given in Curzon's Visits to
Monasteries in the Levant (frontispiece).
<pb n="453"/>
shall find me sitting before him on his seat”; and relying
upon his hope they quickened their steps, and set out
immediately, the horsemen leaving that blessed man
in the porch before the temple. Now until they (i. e.,
the horsemen) had passed the village of Risha he
and the brethren remained in the place of the after-
supper service, but when every man had returned to
his cell, that same Divine power which carried the
Prophet Habakkuk to Babylon, and by which the ship
of the disciples came suddenly to the land whither they
were going,³ and which lifted up the blessed Paul to
heaven and to Paradise, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="242"/> worked on behalf
of this poor monastery at that time when there was
no king, and when this Arab was wishing to compel
those blessed men to transfer to him the monastery
and its estates. And, by the might of the Holy Spirit,
it took him like his companion [Paul] and made him
come into the presence of 'Amran before those old
men and the horsemen who were with them had come
in; and it hid him from his sight, as he stood above
his head until they had knocked at the door, and
suddenly he revealed himself and appeared among
them. And when 'Amran saw him, he looked in sa-
vage anger upon those whom he had sent and upon
the old men, saying, “Since I commanded that Cyriacus
should not come why have ye brought him with you?"
And they all swore [saying]. "We have not seen him
since we left him in the monastery, except at this
present." The blessed man said to him, "I am come
* Literally, "they spread out."
2 See Budge, Book of the Bec, p. 71.
3 St. John vi. 21.
5 'Amran was in bed.
4 2 Corinthians xii. 2-4.
<pb n="454"/>hither to thee before thou couldst look in the mirror
and comb thy head and beard;' be not angry with these
venerable men, for thou shalt never inherit our monas-
tery. Cease from this [thy] wish and let thy hard
heart be softened, and let thy avarice be satisfied, for
behold, thou hast inherited much; and by these things
hast thou made thyself such that no one of thy con-
temporaries will go before thee into hell." And 'Amran,
while wondering and marvelling at the words of the
old man, recognised that all this boldness of speech
which his words had acquired, was of no ordinary
origin, and also that his swift coming and his entrance
into his presence, which had had no need of the open-
ing of a door, and his being hidden from his view
until the entrance of his companions also testified to
this, and he feared and trembled before him, and he
answered and said to them, "Rise up and go in peace
to your monastery, for I have no dispute with you;"
so the blessed men went forth and came to their cells.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="243"/>
CHAPTER XXII.
OF HOW AMRAN AFTERWARDS SENT FIVE ARABS TO LIE IN
WAIT ROUND ABOUT THE CELL OF RABBAN CYRIACUS AND
TO KILL HIM AND TO BRING HIS HEAD TO HIM.
Then the Calumniator, the wicked enemy of the
Christians, and especially of holy men," gave 'Amran
counsel, and he hardened his heart, and he attributed
that which had been done to sorcery, and he judged
that Cyriacus had performed that piece of work which
* Add a point(.) after.
2. e., men who lead ascetic lives.
<pb n="455"/>
had been wrought before him by means of his en-
chantments. And he called secretly those five men of
violence whom he was accustomed to employ to shed
blood, and to do all manner of wickedness, and he
commanded them, saying, "Go to Bêth 'Abhê, and
when it hath become night go down secretly to the
cell of Cyriacus and take his head and bring it to me."
And when those men had come without any man
knowing [of their arrival], and in the thick darkness
of the evening' had come down by the descent which
is called "Way to Shîkôn,' and little by little had drawn
nigh unto the little hill which lay to the north of his
cell, they saw him walking up and down in the open
space before his cell, and they lay in wait until he
slept to fall upon him. Now inasmuch as the holy man
turned his nights into days, and like the blessed Ar-
senius, passed the whole night in watching, he went
up to the place where he used to say the after-supper
service in his cell, and he began to sing the psalms
from the beginning of the Psalter. And that Divine
* I. c., "during the evening service which was sung late in
the night;" compare τò εσлеpivòv, ó εσñepivòs ûµvoç, Du Cange,
Glossarium, col. 437.
For another place of this name see Sachau,
I. e.
Reise in Mesopotamien, p. 433-
3 See supra, p. 29, note 3.
avob: JOA 000 máso?
2007 No 2008 2007
Nos po koax 2007 op pad
poff.2009 2020
on Ds be
Sayings
of
the
Fathers
on
Fasting and ܫܐܢ ܐܢ ܐܝܬܘܗܝ ܚܠܨܐ܀
other labours, Nos. 105, 134. The first of these is given in
Latin by Rosweyde, Vitac Patrum, p. 613.
4 I. c., his private room for services and prayer in the Abbot's
house.
<pb n="456"/>power which the blessed Elisha possessed, by which
there appeared to the young man his servant spiritual
hosts, with their chariots and horses of fire, surround-
ing all the place where Elisha' was, according to the
custom of the might of His power, which strengtheneth
all things, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="244"/> likewise surrounded with fire the
whole place where this holy old man sang the after-
supper service, and those [men] saw the fire and
marvelled. And it appeared to them, moreover, that
not only fire which could not be approached surrounded
him and shot out flames, but also that the whole of his
body was like light, and that every [time] that he bowed
himself to the earth and stood up [again], and spread
out his fingers to heaven, there went forth from them
ten lamps of light which were ascending unto heaven.
And after these things they saw another like unto him²
standing at his right hand, and those men were stupe-
fied and terror-stricken, and they thought with anxiety
that the fire would suddenly come forth from him and
consume them. And when they wished to depart their
bellies clave to the ground upon which they were lying
until it dawned; and when they had been perceived
by certain of the brethren, they went forth to them,
and asked them what was the cause of their [being
there], and the men revealed to them truthfully what
the reason was. Now the old man Ḥenân-Îsho, the
neighbour of Cyriacus swore, saying, "I was one of
those brethren who went to the men." And when the
Read "Elijah"; see 2 Kings ii. 11.
27. e., his special guardian angel; compare St. Matthew
xviii. 10; Acts xii. 7; Daniel iii. 25.
.ܕܒܩܝ for ܕܒܩ 3
<pb n="457"/>
men had gone to him that sent them, and had repeated
to him all [these] things, he desisted from all the evil
which he was ready to do to us, and at the end of
his life he commanded his sons, saying, "The monas-
tery of Beth 'Abhê can never be yours." And when
'Amran died the earth would not receive him, but
three times was he buried, and three times was he
cast forth from it, according to the word spoken con-
cerning him beforehand by the blessed Cyriacus.
⚫ <pb type="textAllignment"  n="245"/>
CHAPTER XXIII.
OF ANOTHER REVELATION WHICH [MÂR CYRIACUS] RECEIVED,
AND OF HOW HE NEEDS MUST BE NAMED AND ACCOUNTED
BISHOP FOR A LITTLE WHILE, AND THEN DEPART FROM
[THIS] WORLD.
Now when the holy man our holy father Mår
Cyriacus had laboured in all kinds of asceticism, the
mother of all uprightness, in voluntary poverty, and
abstinence, and fasting, and prayer, and philosophic
reading in the cell, and holy meditation upon the
Scriptures, and contemplation* [which] pierceth into
things of the future, and the acquiring of things which
endure, and watching which purifieth the thoughts,
and bendings in double, and stretchings out at full
length in making bowings of adoration, and prostra-
tions which make the sweat to flow, like a watchful
Literally "there is nothing to you and the Monastery of
Bêth 'bhê."
2, a rare word.
mmm
<pb n="458"/>guardian he kept a strict watch on all sides that for no
reason whatever a single duty of the ascetic life should
be neglected on his part or on that of his fellow-monks,
and he was like unto a wall to this godly flock. And
when he was waiting and wishing that the ship of the
treasures of his riches had already drawn nigh unto
rest, an angel spake with him, face to face [saying],
"Thou shalt be a Bishop, and then thou shalt rest from
thy troubles. According to the number of the fifty
years in which thou hast led an ascetic life in this
monastery, for fifty days shalt thou be called Bishop;
and then thou shalt by a peaceful death rest in peace.
Behold I am with thee in all thy labours; let thy old
age then be strong, and thy time of life' be renewed,
and a month of days hence believing men, from the
city of Bâlâdh, over whom the Spirit hath appointed
thee governor, shall come for thee; go with them dis-
puting nothing, for the matter is from the Lord, Who
ordereth all thy [acts] as His will pleaseth, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="246"/>
He hath helped thee that thou shouldst be saved."
And when the angel had disappeared from before him,
he took a reed and wrote upon the wall of his cell
concerning this vision which had appeared to him, and
the brethren found this writing after his departure and
read it. And the old man Rabban Elisha, may his
memory be blessed! used to say, "I also read these
lines when I was serving in the monastery, for his
handwriting was still preserved in that cell."
* Literally, "let thy antiquity be renewed."
<pb n="459"/>
CHAPTER XXIV.
OF THE COMING OF THE PEOPLE OF BALADH TO THIS
MONASTERY FOR THE BLESSED MAN [MÂR CYRIACUS],
AND OF HOW THEY HAD WITH THEM A LETTER OF THE
PIOUS MAR TIMOTHY PROHIBITING HIM TO REMAIN IN
THE MONASTERY AFTER HE HAD BEEN CALLED.
Now therefore, when the report, which was filled
with the glory of Christ, of the wonderful deeds which
He was working through the son of His house, Mår
Cyriacus, in this monastery, had flown like a bird with
swift pinions, and had been carried to every quarter
"of the world, and to all peoples, and his glorious
deeds were being repeated in the streets and among
the assemblies for the glorifying of the Holy Church,
the Bishop of the city of Bâlâdh, who had arranged
these holy matters, departed this temporary life. And
because of the glorious things of Rabban Cyriacus,
which were in the mouths of all men, the people of
Bâlâdh sent letters to the holy Mâr Timothy, praying
and entreating him, saying, "We have elected that
thou shouldst set over us as head, and shepherd, and
guardian, and governor, Rabban Cyriacus the ascetic,
the head of the monastery of Béth ‘Âbhê,” (now this
took place, in very truth), and they took the letter
and came for him here. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="247"/> Now a very old
monk whose name was Bar-Ḥěnânâ told me that the
people of Bâlâdh made the expedition to us for the
sake of Már Cyriacus, with horses of long pedigree,
and baggage horses," and mules for burdens, together
There is usually no difference in meaning between
I
must have the meaning of ܒܬܰܕܢܐ but here ܟܕܝܰܘܬܐ and ܒܪ̈ܕܘܢܐ
<pb n="460"/>with eagles, and panthers,' and leopards, and hunting
dogs, an exceeding mighty host, for the inhabitants of
this city were at that time exceedingly prosperous, and
their city was very beautiful and much to be admired.
And when they had gone in before the temple,³ and
had made known the cause of their coming, they were
received by the community with great honour. And
when they gave Mâr Cyriacus the letter which com-
manded him to go down to the Catholicus, his eyes
overflowed with tears, and weeping he lifted up his
face to God like aged Simeon, and said, "Lord, dismiss
Thy servant, according to Thy word, in peace; for be-
hold, mine eyes have seen, and my lips have pro-
claimed Thy great mercy, in that Thou hast set the
limit to the close of my life and to the end of my
years." And he answered and said to the believing
men who came after him, "Beloved, ye have wearied
yourselves for nothing, and your expectation is in vain;
ye cannot rejoice at my being appointed to be your
head, neither can I rejoice at the glory of rearing
you, for I shall [only] live fifty days in your city, and
it sufficeth. It is a mere bundle of bones which shall
be brought in to dwell in your city; may its protection
and generation be prolonged among all the generations
of the world! And our Lord shall raise up for you
plur. See Dozy, Supplément, tom. 1.
the Arab.
p. 69, col. 1.
*
Pers. See Lagarde, Gesammelte Abhandlungen,
no. 139, p. 53.
päsi. e., "hunting panthers;" compare лápdiov Aristotle,
Hist. Anim., ii. 1. The native lexicons explains by
panther, and by
panther.
3 I. e., into the пρоστŵov.
4 St. Luke ii. 29.
.
<pb n="461"/>
after my death a good guardian, and to him will He
grant an extension of life for a long time." And when
they took him away to go [to Bâlâdh], a cry from
all this congregation' went up to heaven, and they
ascribed woe to themselves and to their monastery,
because they were deprived of such a head and <pb type="textAllignment"  n="248"/>
governor of their lives; thus he went down to Mâr
Timothy the Catholicus and was consecrated, and he
went up that he might come to his city. Now Rabban
Elisha told me that when the boat in which he was
travelling arrived at the Ḥesnâ 'Ebhraya,* and was passing
along on this side of it, which faceth the east, the
believers of Môşul sent and stopped it in its course, and
crowds upon crowds of Christians and Arabs came
forth to see that blessed man and to be blessed by
him (now they gave the owner of the boat much
money³ that it might stop for this purpose), and so on
the following day his boat passed on accompanied by
crowds, and went up to his city. Now his entrance
into the city of Bâlâdh took place on the Friday even-
ing before Pentecost.
.ܟܢܘܫܝܐ Read '
was not
* It is evident from this passage that
situated on the left or east bank of the Tigris, close by the
ruins of Nineveh, and it seems pretty certain that Môșul itself, or
some part of it on the eastern side of the town, and lying on the
river bank, is meant by Ḥesnâ 'Ebhrâyâ. In a most valuable
document published by Guidi, (Un nuovo testo, p. 18, at the
top) mention is made of "Mâr Eliyâ who built a monastery by
the side of the Tigris, close to Ḥesnâ 'Ebhrâyâ" ợp hài máso
ܥܒܪܝܐ Guidi's emendation of( ܥܘܡܪܐ ܥܠ ܓܢܒ ܕܩܠܬ ܠܘܬ ܚܣܢܐ ܥܒܝܐ
for is certain). On the Monastery of Mar Elijah, i. e., Dêr
es-Sa'id, see B. O., iii. 1. pp. 263, 264; iii. ii. p. 876; and see
supra, p. 337.
3 For read ..
<pb n="462"/>CHAPTER XXV.
OF THE WONDERFUL DEED WHICH THE BLESSED MÅR
CYRIACUS WROUGHT IN THE CITY OF BALADH, AND OF
THE END OF HIS LIFE.
Now since I have been in the habit of making
enquiries concerning every thing which relates to this
blessed man with great eagerness and desire, for stories
about him are sweet and pleasant to me, one year
when I went on certain business which called me to
the city of Bâlâdh, I asked about his holy grave, and
I was blessed by it. And I went out to the porch'
before the great temple of the church, and I found
there a very old priest, whose name was Nekhwȧr,❜
and with whom I was acquainted when I was the
secretary of the holy Mâr Abraham <pb type="textAllignment"  n="249"/> the Ca-
tholicus in the royal city,³ and I asked that old man to
relate to me any miracles or mighty deeds which the
blessed Mâr Cyriacus had wrought. And having told
me of the many cures [which he had made] and of
the devils which he had driven out from multitudes of
men, he also told me the following:-"In the days of
* 1, e., προστῷον.
2 bass i. e., les, a family name or title of tolerably fre-
quent occurrence, which appears in Greek as ó Naxopayáv, 6
Naxoеpráv, and with the addition of Sar "Chief", ó Σapvax-
oprávns; see Nöldeke, Geschichte der Perser, p. 152, note 2.
Hoffmann proposed a derivation in Feige, Mar Abdhisho und
Mar Qardagh, p. II, note 12, but that he has now abandoned,
and he believes that the word is derived from
Lagarde, Armenische Studien, p. 110, No. 1583), as in
and bar, i. e., "primam sive anticam aciem ducens."
✓ bas occurs in Guidi, Nuovo testo, p. 11, 11. 19, 22.
Ax and has with him a large
3 I. e., Seleucia.
is called
elephants.
nakh (see
The form
Here he
force of
<pb n="463"/>
Mâr Cyriacus there was in this City a Bishop of the
followers of Severus [of Antioch], and much friend-
ship existed between him and our Bishop Cyriacus;
and after the death of Mâr Cyriacus that Bishop relat-
ed to me as follows:-'One day I had risen up early
in the morning, and I had come from my cell to this
your church to go in and to enjoy myself with the
sight and conversation of the holy man your Bishop
Cyriacus. And while I was speaking in the porch
and was not yet inside the church, behold the blessed
man himself came down, and when he saw me he answer-
ed and said to me, Why art thou standing here, master?
And I said to him, I have come to see thee, and to
be blessed by thy holiness. He said to me, Blessed
be thy coming! If thou hadst come to me before I
came out, I would have gone nowhere; but since we
two have met outside, come with me, and let us go
together to pray in the Monastery of Rabban Pithión;'
and," he continued, "he took hold of my right hand
with his left, and thus he and I singing a psalm went
outside the city, and entered into that monastery. And
when we had prayed, and he was still holding me by
my hand, the two of us went down to the Tigris, and
he answered joyfully, and said to me, Come now,
let us cross over and pray in the Monastery of the
holy Rabban Joseph, because his shrine is very dear to
* I. c., Jacobites.
I. e., in the Bishop's cell adjoining the church.
3 This monastery was situated on the right bank of the
Tigris below Beled al-Shâbushtî, and is the b
"which is between Balad and Mosul." See Yakut, tom. ii. p. 673.
1. 5; and Juynboll, Marâşid, t. v. p. 553.
4 This monastery lay opposite to that of Rabban Pethion
<pb n="464"/>me and because he is from my own monastery' <pb type="textAllignment"  n="250"/>,
and because I have not yet seen his monastery. I said
to him, If thou hadst this intention in thy mind
why did we not cross over at the ferry instead of
troubling ourselves to come down to this [place]? And
he looked at me smiling, and said, Hast thou any
doubt that, by the power of God, we can cross over
on a wooden boat only? Now shalt thou see the
power of Christ our Lord. And he made the sign
of the Cross upon the face of the water, and another
upon his own face, and another upon mine, and we
turned to cross over. And while I was afraid lest
peradventure the waters would let us drop through
them, I perceived that they were becoming solid under
my feet as if they were ice-bound, and thus we cross-
ed over the Tigris and went into that monastery. And
when we had come forth from there and he had dis-
missed the brethren who had come forth in honour of
us, and they had returned to their cells, we remained
for a little time on the bank of the river; now he did
this that the monks might go away to a distance and
not be able to see him. And again he answered and
said to me, Let us cross over the river [to the place] exactly
opposite to us, and let us go and pray in the monas-
(i. e., Пudiov), on the left bank of the river, about a farsaḥ
below Eski-Môşul. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 211.
I. e., of Bêth 'Abhê.
2 Of Bessarion it is said by his disciple, "Alio quoque ten:-
pore, cum necessarium ei esset, fecit orationem, et transivit
Chrysoroan fluvium pedibus; ego autem admiratus satisfeci, ei,
dicens: Quomodo sentiebas pedes tuos, dum ambulares in aquâ?
Et ait senex: Usque ad talum sentiebam aquam, reliqua autem
erat solida sub pedibus meis." Rosweyde, Vitae Patrum, p. 649.
3 I. e., "Let us cross over to the right side of the river to Bâlâdh."
<pb n="465"/>
afterwards we will go
him, Do as it pleaseth
tery of Rabban Aaron,' and
into the city. And I said to
thy holiness. And he made the sign of the Cross
upon the waters in front of us, and holding me by the
hand he led me over the river, and we went into the
monastery and prayed, and we went forth from there
and came to the cell of the holy man. Now these
things which that holy old man' related to me, 'Uth-
mân, a believer of the confession of Jacob,³ who was
surnamed Bar-Khusrau, confirmed to us. And Rabban
George, the head of our monastery told me, saying,
"One year I went into the city of Môşul about the
taxes, and I went to the house of this believing man
'Uthman bar-Khusrau, that I might obtain some as-
sistance from him by his speaking for me a good
word to the government, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="251"/> and I found him
reading in the book Huppâkh Ḥushshâbhê,5 of our
holy Mâr Isho-yahbh of Adiabene. And when I had
sat down he said to me, 'I love your monastery of
Bêth 'Abhê for two reasons; firstly, because of this
teacher Isho-yahbh the Catholicus, who is in very
truth a great teacher and debater, and [who] standeth
firmly in the strength of his demonstrations against the
confession of the duality of the Natures in one Person,
which those who follow the Council of Chalcedon
wickedly declare, and I meditate upon his composition
continually; and secondly, because of this story which
See B. O., iii. ii. p. 878, no. 15.
2 I. e., Nekhwâr.
4 I. e., of Bêth 'Abhê.
3 I. e., a Jacobite.
5 See B. O., iii. i. p. 137, note 1. This work is also referred
to by Isho'-yahbh in his letter to Sahdônâ; see supra, p. 136, l. 12.
6 Read, with BC,
nnn
<pb n="466"/>our Bishop who was in Bâlâdh in the days of Cyriacus,
Bishop of that city, who came from your monastery,
and was surnamed 'Gebhîltâyâ,'" related to me.' Now
he told me this history which I heard from our priests
in the city of Bâlâdh, and we must be well aware that
the testimony of adversaries is more exact and more
to be believed [than our own], inasmuch as² in such
matters they have a habit of concealing certain facts,
and concerning some certain and well attested deeds,
which have been wrought by our holy men, they de-
liberately lie. Now when the celebration of the Fast
of the Apostles drew near, the holy Bishop Mâr
Cyriacus died on the Friday³ evening of the comme-
moration of the [twelve] Apostles, with a name filled
with glory, and a remembrance for good, and was
buried in honour with the holy Bishops who had died
before him in that city; may his prayers be for the
whole world, and for the Catholic Church, and may
mercy be shewn to us in the Hall of Judgment, Amen.
Here endeth the Fourth Book.
I. e., "the man of Gebhîltâ." The MSS. have
.ܐܝܟܡܐ ܵa Read with BC
3 I. e., on the Friday preceding the Sunday which is called
Nûsârdėl, the last Sunday of the Week of the Apostles, i. e.,
the first Sunday of the New Year. The word is compounded
of the Persian nau-sard, 'New Year', and 21, 'God', meaning
the Church's New Year'. See Rosen and Forshall, Catalogus,
pp. 31, 50; Wright, Cat. Syr. MSS., vol. I, p. 185, col. I,
no. 101; 190, col. 1, no. 81; Nöldeke, Geschichte der Perser,
p. 407, note 2; Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 59, note 523; Lagarde,
Armenische Studien, p. III, no. 1601; Payne Smith, Thes.,
col. 2326; B. O., iii. ii. p. 383, no. 36. (Daxxx
*Har ämling og moldaş).
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="252"/>
<pb n="467"/>
BOOK V. CHAPTER L OF RABBAN MÅR SHUBHHAL-ÎSHO.
○ our brother [Abhd-Isho], let also this discourse,
which is the fifth of the books of this our history, be
received upon the table of the hearing of thy under-
standing, for by the glorious entreaty of thy electness
my feeble tongue hath run, and will further run, upon.
the excellent matters of the histories of holy men,
those athletes of might and warriors of strength, who
did battle with the body and the passions thereof and
with rebellious devils, and who bound on the crown
of victory and overcame, and were crowned in the
spiritual contest of their lives which pleased God. And
we will place at the beginning of all those histories
which our speech is about to unfold the account of the
victorious deeds of the ascetic priest, and victorious
martyr, the blessed Rabban Mâr Shubhhal-Ishố, the
Metropolitan Bishop; and to it we will add that of the
pious and holy men who followed in his footsteps
throughout the land in which he taught, Mår Yahbh-
lâhâ and Kardagh his brother, as well as that of the
blessed Bishop Mâr Elijah, the men who were ordain-
ed by the pious Mar. Timothy, the Catholicus and
Patriarch, for the countries of the barbarians who were
<pb n="468"/>remote from all understanding and a decent manner
of life, and to whose part of the world no³ preacher
and planter of the truth had ever gone, and where
the doctrine of the glad tidings of our Redeemer had
never been proclaimed. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="253"/> But why should
I speak of the [knowledge] of Christ our Lord [only]?
for they had not even received the knowledge of God,.
the Creator of the worlds and their Governor, like
the Jews and other nations, but they offered, and be-
hold they [still] offer, worship to trees, graven images
of wood, four-footed beasts, fishes, reptiles, birds of
prey, and [other] birds, and such like things, and they
bow down to worship fire and the stars and planets.
[Mar Yahbh Allahâ, and Ķardagh and Mâr Elijah were]
the men who preached the doctrine of Christ in those
countries of Dailômâyê and of Gilâyê,3 and of the
other barbarians who live beyond them, and they plant-
ed in them the light of the truth of the glad tidings
of our Lord, and plucked out from the simple souls
that were there all the abominable thorns and tares of
evil deeds which Satan had sown in their hearts. And
they taught and baptized, and wrought mighty deeds,
and shewed forth wonderful works, and the fame of
their acts was carried to all the ends of the East.
And thou mayest learn clearly concerning all these
things from the letter which certain merchants and
king's scribes, who were going in and coming out
.ܟܪ ܕܘܠܐ but read ,ܟܪ ܕܡܠܐ The MSS. have -
.ܘܩܝܣܐ but read ,ܕܩܤܐ The MSS. have 2
3 Gilân is the country by the Caspian Sea from the Russian
frontier to Resht, and Dêlum, or Dailôm, is the mountainous
territory behind it. See supra, p. 220, note 3.
<pb n="469"/>
from those countries for the purposes of trade and
the business of the government,
wrote to Mar
Timothy.
CHAPTER II.
OF THE ORIGIN OF THE BLESSED SHUBHE AL-ISHO AND
OF HIS COMING TO THIS MONASTERY.
The family of the blessed Shubhḥal-isho was de-
scended from the race of the children of Ishmael, and
his city was Ḥêrtâ-dhe-Na'mân,' <pb type="textAllignment"  n="254"/> but his parents
departed from there, and took up their habitation in
Ḥesnâ Ebhrâyâ, and according to what I have learned,
the blessed man was born and brought up in that
city. And when he had become a young man, having,
by the exceeding care of his parents, been trained in
the Holy Scriptures and instructed in the literature of
the Arabic [language], which was their own tongue,
his parents departed this temporary life, and he and
one sister, who was younger than he, were left behind.
Now their parents had left them much riches, and this
he divided between the two of them, and to his sister
he left the estate and everything that was in the house,
and he took his portion and came to this monastery.
And having served in the monastery and performed
the exercises of the monks in a perfect manner ac-
cording to the command of the fathers, he persuaded
* 7. e. Ḥêrthâ-dhe-Ṭaiyâyê, the ruins of which are less than
half an hour distant from Meshed 'Ali. See Hoffmann, Aus-
züge, p. 97.
I. e., in Môşul.
<pb n="470"/>the community to give him Bêth Ḥabbâ' that he might
sow it and give food to the brethren, according to
what they should receive from the head of the mon-
astery, from the produce of Bêth Zîwâ; and according
to his wish it was given unto him. And he built a
house for the ploughmen, (2. e., a farm) to the south
of this one of to-day, the site of which is well known,
and he bought yokes of oxen, and he hired ploughmen,
and he began to sow and to reap, and to be kind to
and to give gifts to the monks of his congregation,
and to strangers, and to the poor, like that merchant
who traded with Spain with two ships, and [like] the
blessed Apollonius a who lived] in Mount Nétira,
See supra, Book ii. chap. 12, p. 180.
4
* He is mentioned by Palladius in his Hist. Laus.; see the
following page, note 3.
3 The following is the account of this man from the Syriac
version of Palladius:-
ܕܥܠ ܐܦܠܘܢܝܣ܀ ܬܘܒ ܕܝܢ ܐܢܫ ܐܚܪܝܢ ܕܫܡܗ ܐܦܠܘܢܝܣ܆ ܓܒܪܐ ܬܓܪܐ ܐܬܬܠܡܕ
ܥܡܠܗ
ܘܡܢ
ܠܗ.
ܠܣܘܥܪ̈ܢܝܗܘܢ. ܘܟܕ ܫܟܒ ܠܐܚܪܝܢ ܕܐܟܘܬܗ ܫܒܩ ܡܕܡ ܕܐܝܬ ܗܘܐ ܠܗ: ܘܒܥܐ ܡܗ ܕܗܝ
ܗܕܐ ܬܫܡܫܬܐ ܢܫܡܠܐ. ܒܗܿܝ ܕܡܕܒܪܐ ܐܝܬܘܗܝ ܘܡܓܙܝܐ ܡܢ ܨܒܘܬܐ ܕܥܠܡܐ܀ ).585 .fol(
4 I.e., the Nitrian desert near Alexandria; see supra, p. 39, note 3.
<pb n="471"/>
and like that believing man,', the account of whom is
written in the history of the blessed Paphnutius," and
like one of those two [brethren] Pèsis (Paesius) and
' I. e., the rich Alexandrian who gave all that he had to
the poor monks; the account of him as given by Palladius is
as follows:-
(fol. 1846).
2 Born about A. D. 305, died about 400.
The account of these two brethren according to Palladius
is as follows:--
<pb n="472"/>Isaiah, the sons of one merchant, who did not scatter
his portion, but placed it as an offering to God for
the relief of the needy. And when the blessed man
Shubhḥâl-Isho had laboured in this course of life for
many years, and was pleasing Christ by means of His
Saints, certain wicked men in this congregation, through
the working of Satan, the father of lies, and the hater
of the love' Christ left to His disciples, rose up craftily
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="255"/> against him, like Judas among the twelve' [dis-
ciples], and like the seven tares who were among the three
hundred and eighteen Bishops,³ and besides these, like
the disciples who were from among the people who
were jealous of Paul, and of his teaching, and others
who were among the companies of the saints, and
they were envious of that love of love which filled
his holy and believing soul. First of all they began
to make measures which were greater and fuller than
Ford 2007 for at po gozd
Grad
Mausolo 2007 f
ܕܢܦܠܘܚ ܘܢܚܐ ܠܚܡܐ ܕܝܘܡܐ. ܘܢܬܐܡܢ ܒܨܠܘܬܐ ܘܒܨܘܡܐ ܐܡܝܢܐܝܬ. ܗܘ ܕܝܢ ܐܚܪܢܐ
Ad 100
0007
2 Soo 50 Joo pse Lico: Jap of nor
SNA 2000.00
0 2007 Ja
ܠܟܠ ܕܡܣܬܲܩܒܠ ܘܗܟܢܐ ܐܦܩܗ ܠܟܠܗ ܩܢܗ܀ ).fol. 59a)
.ܕܚܘܒܐ Read -
2 St. Matthew xxvi. 48.
3 The allusion appears to be to the three hundred and eighteen
bishops who were assembled at the Council of Nice, A. D. 325,
to discuss the Arian heresy. The "tares" were the bishops Meno-
phantus of Ephesus, Patrophilus of Scythopolis, Theognis of Nice,
Narcissus of Neroniadis, Theonas of Marmarica, and Secundus of
Ptolemais in Egypt. See Theodoret, Hist. Eccles., i. 7; Socrates,
Hist. Eccles., i. 8.
4 Acts xv. I-35.
<pb n="473"/>
those which were in current use everywhere among
the merchants, now this he endured cheerfully, but
finally they began to make him hear cruel words, saying,
"Let our corn lands alone, and depart." And having
sown much seed in the past year, and the harvest
being near, certain sinful men and evil livers, when no
one perceived, devised an artful plot to slay that holy
man, having forgotten all the good deeds which he had
done unto them; and [the words], "They rewarded me.
evil for good, and hatred instead of love," and again,
"The eater of my bread upon whom I trusted greatly,
hath acted craftily against me," were fulfilled in very
deed in the matter of that holy man.
But since our
Lord God willed that those evil men should not be
partakers in that innocent blood, His graciousness did
not in any wise allow that man to be alienated from His
household. And moreover, he that feareth the Lord,
even though it be but a little, and would dare to
commit some evil act, the holy angel which cleaveth
to him alloweth not that evil act to be wrought success-
fully as he would wish, but he extinguisheth and hinder-
eth and confoundeth the manner of his work, even as
he wrought in the case of that blessed man who saw
in the country [of Egypt] the daughter of a priest of idols,
and by the agency of the Evil One he lusted after her.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="256"/> And when he asked her from her father, he
promised to give him to her, but after he had denied
God, and the garb with which he was clothed, and
baptism, the holy angel which clave to him compelled
the Satan who dwelt in the idol, and he returned
answer to the priest, saying, "Thou shalt not give him
Psalm xxxv. 12.
2 Psalm xli. 9.
.
000
<pb n="474"/>thy daughter, for God is with him, and He aideth
him." Now therefore in this manner did that merci-
ful Lord act, Who beareth with all our obstinacy, Who
endureth our wickednesses, and Who doeth good unto
us, until in the righteous judgment which is to come He
will reward us according to our deeds with a measure
pressed down and running over.
Now Rabban Isho-yahbh the Long, from whom I
have received much material for these histories, told
me, saying: "When I was serving in the monastery,
I was sent secretly by the monks who held the affairs
* This story according to Rosweyde (Vitae Patrum, p. 579,
no. 38) is as follows:-"Frater quidam impugnabatur à forni-
catione. Contigit autem eum venire in vicum quemdam Aegypti,
et videns filiam sacerdotus paganorum, adamavit eam, dixitque
patri ejus: Da mihi eam uxorem. Ille autem respondens dixit ei:
Non possum eam tibi dare, nisi rogavero deum meum. Et abiens
ad daemonem, quem colebat, dixit ei: Ecce quidam monachus
venit ad me, volens accipere filiam meam; do ei eam? Res-
pondens daemon, dixit: Si negat Deum suum, et Baptismum,
et propositum monachi, interroga eum. Et veniens sacerdos
dixit ei: Nega Deum tuum, et Baptismum, et propositum monachi,
et dabo tibi filiam meam. Ille verò consensit. Et statim vidit
velut columbam exire de ore suo, et volare in coelum. Pergens
autem sacerdos ad daemonem, dixit: Ecce promisit se tria illa
facturum. Tunc respondens diabolus dixit ei: Non des ei filiam
tuam in uxorem, quia Deus ejus non recessit ab eo: sed adhuc
adjuvabit eum. Et veniens sacerdos dixit illi fratri: Non tibi
possum eam dare; quia Deus tuus adhuc adjuvat te, et non
recessit à te." What follows in Rosweyde says that when the
monk had returned to his senses he went and dwelt in the
desert with a certain old man who prayed to God on his behalf.
At the end of a fast of three weeks the dove again entered
his body by his mouth.
2 St. Luke vi. 38.
<pb n="475"/>
of the community in their hands, saying, 'Go to Rabban
Shubhḥâl-isho at Bêth Ḥabbâ, and inform him, say-
ing, If thou dost not save thyself by flight this night
thou wilt certainly be slain by the assiduity of such
and such persons, who have taken themselves out of
everything which is seemly for the sake of thy de-
struction.' And that truthful old man swore to me,
saying, "When I had told him those things, he be-
gan to weep bitterly; and he answered and said,
'Am I worthy of the reward of being a participator in
the sufferings of Christ? This day hath it been pointed
out to me that the labours of my loving-kindness have
reached unto heaven before God for an everlasting
memorial. I entered Bêth 'Âbhê with earthly riches,
and I have spent them at the word of the mouth of
Christ, according to His command, and this day I shall
go forth from it without even a wallet." And Isho-yahbh
the old man said, "When I saw that I was obliged to
make him set out on the road to flee to the city' without
bread, and without a wallet, inasmuch as he had noth-
ing with him except his tunic and his cloak, I gave
him my own wallet, and I put inside it three loaves"
' I. e., Môşul.
* (see Land, Anecdota, ii. p. 46, 1. 13) - кoλλúpa;
compare Talmudic up, Buxtorf, ed. Fischer, p. 1018. See
also Du Cange, Glossarium, s. v. Kolloúpiov, col. 684; and
Kayser, Die Canones Jacob's von Edessa, p. 107. Brit. Mus.
MSS. Rich 7203, fol. 156a, col. 2, and Orient. 2441, explain
sale by a round, flat loaf, and by Concerning
this last word Dozy (Supplément, tom. I, p. 185) says, "A Damas
on donne le nom de djardaca à une pâtisserie de froment, qui
est mince, puisqu'elle est à peine de l'épaisseur du dos d'un
couteau, grande, ronde, cuite dans de l'huile d'abricots et arrosée
de dibs tirant sur le brun."
<pb n="476"/>of bread, and he departed; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="257"/> and he went down
to the pious Mâr Timothy the Catholicus, and inform-
ed him what had been done to him."
CHAPTER III.
OF THE PUNISHMENT WHICH THIS MONASTERY JUSTLY
RECEIVED FOR THE PERSECUTION OF THE HOLY
SHUBHHAL-ISHO.
If now earthly judges should do unto those who
work wickedness according to what the sword of justice
which they hold demandeth, and should award good
things to good men, this would be according to the
testimony of the scribe of the Spirit, the blessed Paul,
[who saith] "How just then and righteous is our good
God! for He chastiseth and punisheth, and judgeth,
and correcteth in such wise that we may not become
altogether without perception [of sin], having trodden
down conscience and cast out from our minds the
[retribution of] justice which is to come".
Now when [those men] thought that behold they
had slain the righteous man, and they would inherit his
labour, and were making ready to go out and reap
the fields which they had not sown, and to gather
in that which they had not scattered, the Lord brought
up against them only, a huge cloud of locusts, which
devoured all the crops of Bêth Ḥabbâ, and which did not
leave them a remnant; and year after year God sent
this punishment upon them because it was as if the
innocent blood of that innocent man had been shed
by them by murder. And if God would judge a man
<pb n="477"/>
for his readiness of intention, and would take vengeance
upon him for what he wished to do, and would punish him
according to His word, "He that looketh upon a woman
to desire her, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="258"/> hath straightway committed adultery
with her in his heart, and is already accounted an
adulterer"-although [as in the case of the blessed man
who lusted for the daughter of the priest], it is natural
that the man who had subjected himself to that which
was unnatural should be moved with desire for the
beauty of a woman-[how much more would He do so
in this case]? And although murder is an abominable
thing, and ten thousand evil punishments are reserved
for those who commit it, yet those men were prepared
to slay him if an opportunity for doing so had come
into their hands, and they were therefore strictly
speaking murderers and men guilty of the blood of
that holy man.
Now when, according to their custom, the monks
of this monastery were going down to the blessed
Timothy the Catholicus that he might give them help
- for he loved this monastery greatly, and honoured
it with many gifts, because it was here pointed out to
him that he should become Catholicus-he asked how
they and their crops did. And they made answer to
him, saying, "They are going on poorly and badly, for
behold, for some years [past] the locusts have eaten
up our crops in particular [and those of no one else]".
The blessed man said to them, "My sons, the locusts
which devour the fields, and those which eat up the
hidden fruits of your souls, shall not be scraped away
from you, because ye were the cause of the persecution
St. Matthew v. 28.
.ܒܪܓܐ Read 2
<pb n="478"/>and driving away of the holy Mâr Shubhhâl-Îsho
from among you. For our Lord and His holy angels
have testified to me [concerning] these things which
I have learned from old monks in this monastery, and
which I have not imagined out of my own mind, but
have judged according to that which is said by the
holy man, 'If an act of sin which happeneth accidentally
is deserving of seventy and sevenfold punishment,
how many times seventy and seven shall an act of
wilful sin be punished?"" <pb type="textAllignment"  n="259"/> Assume [if ye will] that
for a man to look upon a woman is an act of accidental
sin, but the going out of those wretched men to commit
murder is certainly an act of wilful sin; even so are
these things.
CHAPTER IV.
OF THE LAYING ON OF HANDS WHICH THE BLESSED MAR
SHUBHḤAL-ISHO RECEIVED TO BE THE METROPOLITAN
OF GILAN AND DAILOM.*
If now according to the goodness of his master,
and according as he is able, a servant shall endeavour
to measure the steps of his course of life along the
smooth paths of his commandments, and shall arrange
every thing concerning himself for the good will and
pleasure of his master, he will be glorified with the
glory of his master, and will be made ruler over all
his treasures, for the treasure shall be added unto and
increased by his industrious trafficking, like the man who
received five talents and made them ten, and him that
2 See supra, p. 220, note 3.
* Compare Genesis iv. 24.
<pb n="479"/>
[received] two and made them into four, and both heard
[the words], "Well done, good and faithful servants, ye
have been faithful in little, and much shall be entrusted
into your hands". According to the might of every man
it is required of him: from him that hath received much
that he should labour much [is required], and from him
unto whom little hath been given little [is required]; every
Iman according to his might, saith our Lord, to Whom
be glory. And a certain holy man testifieth [to this],
saying, "One man converteth a mighty people, and
another a small district, and another hath acquired
his own soul only; yet in excellence [all three] are
equal."
Now in respect of this man of whom we speak,
inasmuch as he was exceedingly able, very much was
entrusted into his hand. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="260"/> And when he went
down to the holy Mâr Timothy, who having learned
concerning all his affairs, and seen that he was in-
structed in the Syriac language and learning, and also
in the Arabic and Persian tongues, determined to
anoint him with holy oil, and to make him hold the
pastoral staff, and to send him as a shepherd and teacher
to the barbarian nations who had never received the
bridle of the teaching concerning God, and into whose
_country none of the preachers and evangelists of the
kingdom of heaven had gone since the time of the
Apostles until the present. And when he advised him
to undertake this thing, relying upon the Lord and
upon the Divine help which would cleave to him and
which would convert those erring nations by his hand,
St. Matthew xxv. 21.
2 This passage is quoted in B. O., iii. ii. p. 16.
<pb n="480"/>inasmuch as this work to which he was called was
from the Lord, he undertook [it] with fear and joy.
And the day of the consecration of the blessed man
was celebrated with the great ceremony which belongeth
to a festival full of all joyous things, and all the chief
men, among the believers who heard that he had
undertaken the conversion of those countries, provided
him with much money, and with the necessary clothing,
and together with the Divine power and the venerable
disciples who accompanied him, he set out for those
countries. Now Mar Abraham, the Catholicus, a holy
man in very truth, related to me fully concerning all
this matter [of Mâr Shubhḥal-Åshö], and he told me
that he made his entrance there with exceeding great
splendour, for barbarian nations need to see a little
worldly pomp and show to attract them and to make
them draw nigh willingly to Christianity.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="261"/> And when he had entered those countries he
began to teach and to shew them the true knowledge
of his doctrine, and while he was teaching with these
words, Christ our Lord was confirming them by the
miracles which he worked, by cleansing the lepers, by
healing the sick, by opening the eyes of the blind, by
making the lame to walk, by raising the dead, and by
making barren women fruitful, for the Divine dispen-
sation is accustomed to shew forth mighty works at
the beginning of Divine operations, more particularly
in the case of those barbarians who from their earliest
times and throughout all their generations had been
led captive by evil devils to the worship and service
of their corrupt things. And by the sight of the
miracles which our Lord worked by the hands of the
blessed man, he taught many cities and thickly peopled
<pb n="481"/>
districts, and baptized [their inhabitants], and brought
them near to the doctrine of Divine life. And he built
churches, and established priests and deacons in them,
and he set apart some of the brethren who were with
him to teach them psalms and spiritual praises, and
he himself went further and further into the country,
until [he arrived at] the ends of the East in the great
teaching which he made among the heathen, and
Marcionites, and Manichees,³ [against] every object
* The rest of the chapter is quoted in B. O., iii. 1. p. 491,
col. 2.
2. The heretic Marcion lived in the second century
of our era. He held that there were four unbegotten existences,
and that an irreconcileable opposition existed between the
Creator and the Christian God. He condemned marriage, he
fasted on the Sabbath, he rejected much of the Old Testament,
and only accepted the Gospel of St. Luke, which he mutilated.
For the history of the man, his views, his blasphemies and his
sect, see Tillemont, Mémoires, t. ii. pp. 122-130. Ephraim,
Zenobius and Paul, disciples of Saint Ephraem, Bôd, the Perio-
dentes, Daniel of Ras 'Ain, and others wrote treatises against
the heresy of Marcion. See B. O., iii. 1. pp. 43, 63, 170, 219
and 223.
3 Mani or Manes, the founder of the sect of the Manichees,
sprang from a family of the Magians, but embraced Christianity
about the middle of the third century of our era. According
to Eusebius (Hist. Eccles., vii. 31) he first proclaimed himself
to be Christ, and afterwards to be the very Paraclete and the
Holy Spirit. He selected twelve disciples and sent them out
into the world to preach his doctrine. For a history of the
sect and its title see Tillemont, Mémoires, t. iv. pp. 152-171.
Akin to the Manichees in belief was the famous (or infamous)
بابك الخرمي led by Babak al-Hurrami البابكية Babaki sect
He is first mentioned A. H. 201 (see Ibn al-Athir, ed. Torn-
berg, tom. vi. p. 231, 1. 7), and he was slain A. H. 223 (see
Tabari, ed. de Goeje, ser. iii. tom. ii. p. 1015, 1. 10). The
PPP
<pb n="482"/>of worship and every impure thing; and he sowed
among them the glorious light of the doctrine of the
Gospel, the mother of life and peace.
CHAPTER V.
OF THE MURDER OF THE HOLY MAR SHUBHHAL-ÎSHO AND
OF THE GLORIOUS TESTIMONY OF HIS CORONATION.
If the covenant of our freedom from death, and sin,
and Satan was written with blood on the top of the
mount of Golgotha' in the body of Jesus, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="262"/> Who
collated it, and signed it and gave it to His disciples, and
if they also sealed their dispensation among all nations
- for Stephen was stoned, the head of James³ was cut
off, the brains of James the brother of our Lord* were
crushed by a blow, Simon [Peter] was crucified, Paul
doctrines and belief of this sect resembled those of the Magians
in many particulars. The Arabic text of the history of Babak
and his parentage, etc., is given by Flügel, Kitâb al-Fihrist,
Leipzig, 1871, p. 343; see also Bâbek seine Abstammung und
erstes Auftreten, by Flügel in Z. D. M. G., Bd. xxiii. p. 531ff.
St. Matthew xxvii. 33; St. Mark xv. 22; St. John xix. 17.
* At Jerusalem, and he was buried in Kephar Gamla.
3 I. e., James the brother of John. Herod Agrippa slew
him one year after the Ascension of our Lord. He was buried
in Akar, a city of Marmârîķa. See Lipsius, Apostelgeschichten,
t. ii. 2, p. 26.
He was slain by a blow from a fuller's staff, and by ston-
ing. See Lipsius, Apostelgeschichten, tom. ii. 2. p. 231.
5 Head downwards (x3), by Nero, A. Gr. 376. See
Book of the Bee, ed. Budge, p. 104.
<pb n="483"/>
was slain, Bartholomew was flayed," the side of Thomas
was torn open,³3 and Mår Simon,* Shâhâdôst³ and
Barba shěmin, the heads of the throne of the Eastern
Church were slain, and others in all countries-it is
then a glorious thing for disciples to be like unto their
masters, and to be shepherds slain for the sake of
their flocks, and keepers of treasure stoned for the sake
of the sacred things [under their charge]; and this is
what happened also to this person worthy of all good
things, our holy father Mår Shubhḥâl-Ishố.
Now when he had remained in those countries for
many years, while God planted and watered and
nourished by his hands, like the blessed Paul, he was
wishing to come [back] to the Bethel of his fathers,
* For the Nestorian account of his death see Book of the
Bee, ed. Budge, p. 107.
* According to the Book of the Bee, ed. Budge, p. 106,
Bartholomew was crucified by Hûrsti King of Armenia, where
he had been an apostle for thirty years. See also Lipsius,
Apostelgeschichten, tom. ii. 2, pp. 59, 99 and 104.
3 Thomas taught the Parthians, Medes and Indians. The
King of India stabbed him with a spear because he had baptized
his daughter. The body of Thomas was brought to Edessa
by Ḥabbân. See Wright, Apocryphal Acts, vol. i. p. 297;
Acta Thomae, ed. Bonnet, p. 83 ff.; Lipsius, Apostelgeschichten,
t. i. p. 236.
* A martyr who suffered in the second year of the perse-
cution of Sapor; see B. O., i. p. 188.
3 I. e., Pers.
"King's friend." He succeeded Mâr
Simon in the Bishopric of Seleucia, and was beheaded in Bêth
Låphat, the metropolis of the Hûzâyê, in the second year of
the persecution of Sapor; see B. O., i. p. 188, col. 1.
6 He succeeded Shâhâdôst in the Bishopric of Seleucia, and
was beheaded in Ledan, a city of the Hûzâyê, in the sixth year
of the persecution of Sapor; see B. O., i. p. 190, col. 2.
<pb n="484"/>namely, to this monastery, and to pay back the gifts
of honour due [from him] to the monastery from which
he had gone forth, and was esteeming that which had
happened [to be] a benefit [to him]-as was the selling
of Joseph by his brethren '-and he forsook the fields
of the doctrine of life which he had sown, and the
churches which he had founded, and the temples which
he had established to the Lord, until he could come
and worship and return there.' But when the Enemy,
the hater of all truth, saw that his own doctrine was
Imade a mockery, and that the fire-temples³ and the
fire-altars of his cakes were pulled down, he plotted
death against the blessed man by the hands of certain
workers of evil, a remnant that remained. And when
they saw that he was provided with every thing which
befitted the honour of his monastery, and that he
began to go forth from thence, they went before him
craftily, and sat down in ambush waiting for him, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="263"/>
Genesis xxxvii. 28.
I. e., to Bêth 'Abhê.
3 literally, "things in which fire was placed."
ܒܝܬܐ ܕܨܠܡܐ i, a word which in A is wrongly glossed byܕܪܘܩܐ ܀
ܕܡܙܪܝܚܐ ܗܘܐ ܒܗܘܢ ܢܘܪܐ ܡܢ but which is rightly explained as things
; see Feige, Die Geschichte des Mar'Abhdisho, text,
p. 57, translation p. 39, at the top. The word is com
posed of âdâr 'fire', and ûk a derivative termination; compare
(Kalilag und Damnag, ed. Bickell, p. 13, 11. 11. 13;
Z.D. M. G. Bd. xxx. p. 768) from Persian ); ug in an eas,
but read Ķârûgbad, (Act. Mart., I. 345; Patkanian,
Fournal Asiatique, 1866, I. p. 187) "chief of the workmen"
sas, papvoÛxos (Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 95); o?? (Hoff-
mann, Auszüge, p. 34); os from parr 'feather';
مكون طسوج
5 See supra, p. 390, note I.
<pb n="485"/>
and at a terrible spot on that road they surrounded
him, and crowned him with swords. Thus the blessed
man departed from [this] laborious life, flowing with
the blood of the reproach and disgrace of the Cross,
to the greatly desired chambers of Paradise. And
certain Christians who had become his disciples, when
they had learned [these things], went out to search
for him and took his holy body, and according to their
power and knowledge, they buried him hastily in a
church, and mourned for him greatly; and they gathered
together from the men who had murdered him the
things which had been made for him, vails, curtains,*
and stoles in which the priest administers the sacrament,
which they had taken from him, and sent them to
Mâr Timothy, and some of them were handed on to
this monastery. To Christ our Lord, Who made that
* Bila, the vail or curtain with which the door or
doorway of the choir is covered. See B. O., iii. I. p. 532,
chap. 13; p. 533, chap. 16; p. 528, chap. 15; Kayser, Die
Canones, p. 6, 1. 13.
-ßeßupa, (Du Cange, Glossarium, col. 186) and
кαταлеτάσματα (Du Cange, Glossarium, col. 611).
Apostolorum Adaei et Maris,
Urmia, 1890, 4to. p. 27, 1. 7.
occurs in Liturgia Sanctos'uu ܡܩܒܠܬ .The sing .ܣܒܠܓܐ 3
See Duval's review of .ܡܠܒ ܠܗ ܤܒܠܐ ܘܟܐܡ ܢܬܘܪܐ ܥܠ ܕܪ̈ܥܬܒܢܝ ܀ (
pub
p. 483. The
in Revue Critique, June 20, 1892,
seems also to be called xex and
which the deacon or other ministrant uses for picking up any
particle of the wafer, or for wiping up any drop of the wine
while administering the Eucharist to the laity. See Badger,
Nestorians, vol. I. p. 225; and Grant in Ritter, Erdkunde,
Bd. ii. p. 611. Compare also the wpápiov, Du Cange, Glos-
sarium, col. 1792; and the 350 in Assemânî, Codex Liturgicus,
tom. viii. p. 47, ll. 12, 13, 16.
<pb n="486"/>noble athlete to be victorious, be glory and honour, and
praise, and worship, and may His mercy be upon the
assembly of His worshippers and friends for ever and
ever, Amen, and Amen.
CHAPTER VI.
OF MAR YABHLÂHA, AND OF MAR KARDAGH HIS BROTHER.
From the whole circle of the Holy Scriptures we
may learn that the piety of the acts of [men's] lives
which are wrought secretly, and of all the good
qualities of the soul which are perfected spiritually
in the hidden man, is not by any means hidden [on the
contrary, for] God, for the gratification of Whose will
[these things] have been wrought by righteous and
holy men, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="264"/> maketh [them] manifest straightway;
and [this we know] especially from the living mouth of our
Redeemer, [Who] saith, "When thou prayest, enter into
thy chamber and shut thy door, and pray to thy Father
Who is in secret, and thy Father Who seeth in secret
will reward thee openly." And He will increase and
make to rejoice those of His household³ in this world,
and He will shew that they are His glorious [subjects]
and men united in concord* by the signs and powers
. of healing which are wrought by them and by their
hands in every kind of way, and will reward them in
the kingdom of heaven by making them to live before
His face with everlasting happiness. And this was
.ܘܕܛܒܐ Read *
.ܠܒܝܬܝܘܗܝ Read 3
St. Matthew vi. 6.
* All the MSS. have 30, but read Co.
<pb n="487"/>
what was wrought upon that holy union in blessed
brotherhood of body and of spirit, Rabban Yahbhlâhâ
and Abba Kardagh his brother, the Metropolitans of
the countries which have before been mentioned in
writing. Now these two blessed men [came] from
Rêsh Ainâ, a village of Saphsâphâ, in this country
of Marga, and both became disciples together in this holy
monastery. And they excelled in chastity and in all
the various kinds of observances which the sublime
monastic life demandeth, the keeping of the tongue
and of the passions, the evening fast, the watching all
night, the prayer for collecting the thoughts, and the
[keeping] pure the dwelling-place³ of Godhead, even
according to the words of the blessed Mark the monk
who in these three virtues included the whole ascetic
life, namely, "Let a man cleanse his thoughts, let him
pray without ceasing, and let him endure those things
which shall come [upon him];" with these three virtues
were these brethren adorned. Now the old man
Kardagh was younger than his brother, and he was
a beautiful writer; and Yabhlâhâ was a book-binder,
like the blessed Mar Aḥâ and his brother." And they
were praised by the tongues of all men, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="265"/> ac-
cording to what the holy Mâr Abraham told me,
saying, "In the beginning when I came [here] to be a
solitary, I worked in the monastery for the whole of
the specified space of three years,³ and I did not know
I. e., Gîlàn and Dailôm, and the remote countries bc-
yond them.
Lying between Akra and Gunduk; see Hoffmann, Auszüge,
pp. 199, 225.
.ܕܟܝܘܬܐ ܕܡܥܡܪܐ or ܕܟܝܘܬ ܡܥܡܪܐ Read either 3
4 See supra, p. 252.
5 See B. O., iii. ii. p. 858.
<pb n="488"/>if Kardagh had ever lifted his eyes or opened them
to look upon me; and I thought, concerning him,” he
I was saying to me, “perhaps he is blind. The labours
and humility of Rabban Yahbh Allâḥa were," he was
saying to me, "more excellent than [those of] his brother,
but in each one of them there was some one thing in
which the one was superior to the other."
Now inasmuch as the holy Mâr Shûbhḥâl-Îsho had
finished the course of his testimony, it was necessary
that another man should be chosen to succeed him, to
go and rear the flocks which had been brought into
the fold of life by the care of that holy man. And
when Mâr Timothy, of pious memory, had urged this
[service] upon every man who was able to do this,
and there was no one who would undertake the work
for God's sake like unto that man, the blessed Mar
Catholicus was obliged to send to this monastery for
these two blessed brethren, that he might consecrate
them bishops, and send them to those countries.
CHAPTER VII.
OF THE CHOICE OF THE HOLY MEN TO BE SENT TO THOSE
COUNTRIES (1. E., GILAN AND DAILÔM).
We must learn and recount that many shepherds
have been chosen for all parts of the world from this
holy monastery, who, through their splendid triumphs,
have appeared in their generations like unto lamps set
upon the candlestick the of Church, [and we must also
Read, with Vat.,
<pb n="489"/>
learn and recount that this monastery] hath been named
by the ancients the "house of the priesthood," and the
"father of the pillars of the holy Church" by reason
of the men who have in all generations gone forth
[from it], and who have become shepherds set over
the flocks of Christ. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="266"/> And they did not only
accept established and princely' thrones, which were
[situated] in flourishing towns and civilized countries,
but also [those of] the countries which were destitute of all
knowledge of Divine things and holy doctrine, and
which abounded in sorcery and idolatry and all corrupt
and abominable practices, that they might uproot the
evil and sow the good, and drive out the darkness of
error and make to shine upon them the glorious light
of their doctrine, and cast forth the devils [who were]
teachers of all uncleanness. And that this was so we
may learn from the blessed Mår Shubhḥál-isho, and
from these blessed men' who succeeded him, and who
because of their labour in other matters of the ascetic
life, did not wish to depart. And [Mâr Timothy] wrote³
here that the blessed Yahbhlâhâ³ and Kardagh should
go down to him, saying that it was meet for them to
preserve and rear the [fruits of the] teaching of Mâr
Shubhḥâl-Îsho, like a goodly inheritance handed on from
one brother to another, according to what is said, "If
the brother of a man die and leave a widow without
children, let his brother take his wife and raise up
seed to him;" in this latter case according to the body,
1. See Hoffmann, Syr. Arab. Gloss., No. 1542, p. 54;
Duval, Lexicon, col. 303; Payne Smith, Thcs., col. 401.
.ܛܘܪܢܐ read ܛܘܒܐܐFor 2 ܕܟܬܒ Read 3
4 I. e., to Bêth 'Abhê.
6 Deuteronomy, xxv. 5-9;
5 Read pap?
Genesis xxxviii. 8.
999
<pb n="490"/>and in the former according to the spirit. So the two
went down according to the rule of the Church, and
[Mâr Timothy] anointed them both Metropolitans, Kardagh
of Gilân and Yahbhlâha of the people of Dailôm.
And when they came up to this monastery to put their
affairs in order, there went with them according to
what I have learned, fifteen monks [who were] holy and
enlightened men, that they also might be companions
with them in the spiritual labour of the Gospel of
Christ, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="267"/> and among those men were those who
were appointed to be Bishops of the countries beyond
Gilân and Dailôm.' For I have read the letter of Mar
Timothy the Catholicus to Mâr Yahbhlâhâ and the
letter which was sent by him in answer to the Catho-
licus, saying, "Through thy prayers, ○ our father, by
the grace of Christ, many nations have been converted
to the belief of the truth, and we want to appoint
Bishops over them from among the ascetics who have
come with us." And Mâr Catholicus wrote to them
this, "Inasmuch as the ordination of a Bishop doth not
absolutely require [the presence of] three persons, and
ye in your country are free from this [regulation], ye
have permission [to do so] by the power of the word
of our Lord, in which every thing standeth and is
directed. Appoint as Bishops whomsoever ye and
the pious Kardagh shall choose, and in the place of
the third [person who should be present], let the Book
of the Gospels be laid on the [episcopal] throne on
the right hand; thus by the hand of God perform
the ordination of the first Bishop, and let others be
The next fourteen lines are quoted in B. O., iii. 1. p. 163,
col. I.
<pb n="491"/>
appointed by means of [this] third [person]. May the
Divine Spirit direct and govern His sanctifications by
your means even as He did with the blessed Apostles."
And when the blessed men had received this permission
from the Patriarch, they ordained and made Thomas,
Zacchaeus, Shem, Ephraim, Simon, Ananias and David,
bishops of the countries which had been taught by their
hands, through the signs and mighty deeds which had
been manifested by them, no one of which, on account
of their number and the remoteness of the countries
in which they were wrought and completed, have we
been able to distinguish clearly how it was worked,
or in what village or city, or in whom a healing was
performed, or from whom devils and sicknesses were
expelled. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="268"/> And I think, if we were to make
false or incorrect statements, and to attempt to paint
a picture of miracles which were never manifested to
us, that this presumption would bring great danger
upon him that should write down something with which
he was not acquainted. Now the names of those
persons among them who were elected and anointed
for the episcopacy were handed down to me by vener-
able old men-but more especially by the holy old man
Elisha-for they heard concerning them from the mouth
of Mår Yahbhlâhâ, who twice came to this holy
monastery from Dailôm, and paid to the holy mo-
nastery of his fathers the honour which he was bound
[to give]. Mar Kardagh, however, because he had
penetrated far into the countries which were beyond
* For the service for the consecration of Bishops and Metro-
politans see B. O., iii. ii. p. 683 ff.
.ܠܥܘܡܪܐ read ܠܥܘܡܪܐ For 2
<pb n="492"/>those where his brother was, never came back here.
But now if thou wishest to learn in part' concerning
the wonderful deeds which took place at their hands,
consider in thy mind, that not without cause and simply
through words divorced from deeds did those barbarian
nations of daring thieves, and plunderers, and worship-
pers of devils turn from their polluted religions, which
were established without the labour of fasting and prayer,
and despise the customary acts of the service of hateful
things, and bow their necks to the submission of the
yoke of fasting and of prayer, of vigil by nights, and
of abstinence from every [kind of] food on the stated
fasts and holy festivals. How fitting is it to quote here
the words of the holy monk Ammonius, the chosen Bishop
in the Church of God, who wrote in one of his letters
to his disciples, saying, "For this reason the fathers
lived apart in the desert, whether it be Elijah' the
Tishbite or John.³ Do not imagine that these men
who were righteous among men were able to cultivate
righteousness while they lived among men, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="269"/> for
they first of all dwelt in great solitude, and thus received
the power of God that it might dwell in them, and
then, possessing all virtues, God sent them among
men to be His stewards, and to heal the sicknesses of
men. It was, then, only when all their own sicknesses
had been healed, that they were sent, for it is not
possible that a soul possessing any defect whatever
should be sent among mankind for edification. And
I, your father, also say, because I have written these
*
partly.
* See I Kings xix. 9.
3 I. e., John the Baptist.
See St. Matthew iii. 1.
.ܡܕܪܣܝܢ Read ܀
<pb n="493"/>
things to you, that I endured a great fight in the desert
and in the mountain, and then [only] did I arrive at
this condition [of perfection]." Thus far according to
the words of the blessed Ammonius.
Now this pair of holy men having been first of all
healed [of their own sicknesses], and having gathered
together treasure of the good things of heaven by
tranquil solitude and by labours of asceticism in this
holy monastery, were then sent forth as apostles by
God to the countries of the heathen to make their
souls to live. And they became like rays of light
from the height of the eminence of their course of life,
and the pure lamps of their doctrine were shining
brightly, being set not under the bushel and measure
of sluggishness, but upon a candlestick, and they
lightened all the ends of the East. And like the blessed
Apostles in their days, they also taught the erring
nations by the piety of their daily life, and by abstinence
from every [kind of] food, as the canon of the doctrine
of our Lord requireth, Who when His disciples asked
Him, "Why were we not able to heal him?" said distinctly,
"This kind goeth not out except by fasting and by
prayer."
And, moreover, the bread which is in those countries
is made of rice, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="270"/> for the blessed family of wheat and
barley is not found there, and there is nothing except
rice and other kinds of dry grain,³ and this we have
* St. Matthew xvii. 21.
2 See Ritter, Erdkunde, t. viii. pp. 431-434-
3 Read, with Vat., . See Hoffmann, Syr. Arab. Gloss.,
No. 3203, p. 114; Duval, Lexicon, col. 587; Payne Smith, Thes.,
col. 938; Ahrens, Das Buch der Naturgegenstände, p. 41, l. 9;
Loew, Aram. Pflanzennamen, p. 55, foot note.
<pb n="494"/>learned from the mouth of Mår Yahbhlâhâ, of holy memory,
for the old men Ḥenân-isho and Elisha told me that
he said, "As I began my journey to come here I arrived
at [the dwelling of] the pious Mâr Ḥabbibhâ, the
Metropolitan of the city of Râi, and when I had
partaken of food and bread made of wheat I became
exceedingly sick, because I was accustomed in those
countries to a diet of rice-bread." And when [these
men] had laboured in that uncultivated country for
many years, and had spread abroad the Gospel of our
Lord in those rational" countries, and had taught, and
converted, and baptized and sanctified many, they all
of them ended their days there, and [their names] were
written down with the first-born, [whose names] are
written down in heaven, in the Book of the Kingdom,
and happiness is laid up for them with the Prophets,
and Apostles, and teachers, and martyrs, by whose
prayers may our Lord make priesthood to be at peace
with royalty; and may wars be abolished from the
ends of the earth, and may our Lord give to the whole
world, and especially to His Holy Church, of His hope,
and rest and peace from all conflicts, and may we all
lift up praise to the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Spirit, for ever, Amen.
* I. e., 'Payaí, Rhages (see Tobit. i. 14; iv. 20; ix. 2) a
_town the ruins of which are situated about 25 miles S. E. of
Teherân. It seems to have existed in the time of the last
Babylonian Empire; it was rebuilt by Seleucus Nicator who
called it Europus; and it was finally destroyed in the XIIIth
century of our era. See Strabo, xi. 9. 1; xi. 13. 6; and Ker
Porter, Travels, vol. I, p. 358.
2 The MSS. have but read. See p. 278, 1. 13
(text).
<pb n="495"/>
CHAPTER VIII.
OF THE BLESSED MÅR ELIJAH, BISHOP OF MUKÂN [AND OF
THE COUNTRIES OF THE BARBARIANS].
Now having walked along the path of words in the
histories of holy men, step by step, as along a ladder,
and having revealed according to the sufficiency of
my feeble knowledge, certain of their triumphs and
noble deeds, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="271"/> I have now arrived at, and drawn
near to enter into the Paradise, full of the blossoms
and the beautiful odours of the glorious acts of our holy
father Mâr Elijah, the simple but wise man, the untutored
but full of understanding, the ignorant in speech but en-
lightened in mind, for he lacked nothing in his humility
[to prevent my] speech' from exalting him above
teachers. And, moreover, when the scribes and priests
[of old] considered that the simple fishermen, the
Apostles his fathers, were unlettered and ignorant men,
the Apostles rejoiced that they were worthy to be
spoken evil of for the sake of their Lord. Now this
blessed twig was the produce of the gardening' of the
divine Mâr Jacob, and his village was ‘Ain Baķrê³ in the
country of Margâ; and having forsaken it and all the
things of earth, his city to-day is heaven, and his com-
panions are the Prophets and Apostles and Martyrs
and all the ascetic Fathers, the glorious manner of whose
lives he emulated. Now when he had elected to devote
himself to the labours of the ascetic life, he himself*
.ܡܢ ܕܥܬܝܕܐ ܡܠܬܐ Read -
2
a rare word.
3 The form 'Ain Barkê occurs on p. 59, 1. 6 (text); see
supra, p. 103, note 3.
.ܕܢܦܠܚ: ܠܝܬܗ ܐܫܪܚ Read 4
<pb n="496"/>invented a distinct manner of life, and held fast to it
from the beginning of his discipleship; for he possessed
neither cell, nor place for storing his things," nor [any
house] built with mud walls, and having a roof with
thick beams and a framework with strong rafters,"
nor any place which needed repairs, or expenses, or
watching [against] falling down suddenly,³ or shocks,
but [he built a hut] of reeds and grass and of bands
[made] of the thin, pliant branches of trees similar to
that which watchers of vineyards, and husbandmen and
gardeners make for themselves, of sufficient [width] to
cover his body, and of sufficient [height for him] to
stand up and pray, and to perform those things which
must needs be done by all those who are fettered by
the flesh and its needs. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="272"/> And he surrounded
his booth with a hedge made of reeds and narrow
[strips] of wood, and [he made] a door of reeds similar
to that which they make for sheep-folds, and whether he
was inside or out, it was always fastened by a fastening
and shut. Now he possessed no utensils, 6 for having
τρένο της ἀποθήκη.
2 The use of A³ (which usually translates “running
waters", see Genesis xxx. 38, 41; Exodus ii. 16) for "rafters"
.17 .Canticles i (רהיטנו Keri) וְחִיטָנוּ בְּרוֹתִים is very unusual; compare
3 pos, compare Arab. ✓.
* See Loew, Aram. Pflanzennamen, No. 121, p. 166.
5 A 0, but read A 03 Strictly speaking 103 are the long,
thin, young branches of poplar or willow trees. Compare b
longue branche détachée d'un arbre, p. e. d'un peuplier (Dozy,
Supplément, t. i. p. 571). In Muḥit al-Muhit Buṭrus Bistânî
والروط عند العامة
عود طويل من الشجر كالحور ونحوه says
6 The MSS. have, but read; see Hoffmann, Syr.
Arab. Gloss., No. 4880, p. 190.
<pb n="497"/>
reduced himself to the lowest depth of voluntary poverty,
such things, which were held to be of great value by
others, appeared to him superfluous; but he had a
broken vessel, in which he used to put the dry crust
of bread upon which he lived, and an earthenware jar
into which he cast salt seasoned with wild thyme.'
In [the court-yard of] his cell he had a well without
a rope and without a bucket, and he made use of a
long reed to supply the place of a rope, and on the
top of this he tied a small jar, and each evening he
used to take his crust of bread, and sit by the well,
and draw up water and pour over it, and he ate and
it was sufficient for him; but as for [other] foods or
wine they never entered his cell, neither did he make
use of them. The garments which were on his body
were alike his clothing and his bed, though his ascetic
mode of life did not need a bed; but a seat against
the wall-according to what I have learned from the
pious and holy Mår Abraham-served as a sleeping
place for him, even according to the words of the
holy Mâr Evagrius, "Voluntary poverty is this, that a
man shall possess nothing except a cloak, a tunic, ³ a
Bible, and a cell." Now when he went to the con-
By See Loew, Aram. Pflanzennamen, No. 270, p. 325;
and Hoffmann in Z. D. M. G., Bd. xxxii. p. 752; Payne Smith,
Thes., col. 3450.
Read
3 On the dress of monks see B. O., iii. ii. p. 898; compare
also Land, Anecdota, tom. ii. p. 156, 1. 22; and Usener, Der
Heilige Theodosios, p. 171.
* Compare "Dixit abbas Evagrius, fuisse quemdam fratrem,
qui nihil habuit in substantiâ suâ, nisi tantùm Evangelium, et
ipsum vendidit in pauperum nutrimento. Dicens quodam verbo,
quod memoriae dignum est commendari: Ipsum etiam, inquit,
rrr
<pb n="498"/>gregation on stated days. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="273"/> he used to take'
the Bible which he read with him in his cloak, and
lay it upon the Ķestromâ³ of the temple until he went
back to his cell [when] he took it with him; but his
cell he left [unguarded] without fear, according to the
words of the blessed Evagrius, "The man that hath
prepared himself for voluntary poverty dwelleth in
peace of mind," and again he saith, "The monk who
hath embraced voluntary poverty is a swift traveller;
let him dwell wherever he wishes without fear." Such
things concerning his voluntary poverty and asceticism
we have thus briefly related.
verbum vendidi, quod jubet, vende omnia, et da pauperibus."
Rosweyde, Vitae Patrum, p. 582, No. 5. "Interrogatus est
senex quidam à fratre, quid faceret ut salvus esset. Ille autem
exspolians se vestimento suo, et cingens lumbos suos, atque
extendens manus, dixit: Sic debet nudus esse monachus ab
omni materiâ saeculari, et crucifigere se adversus tentationem
atque certamina mundi." Rosweyde, op. cit., p. 583, No. 16.
The quotations from Evagrius made by Thomas of Margâ pro-
bably form part of the Μοναχὸς ἢ περὶ Πρακτικής, extracts
from which are given by Cotelerius, Eccles. Graec. Monumenta,
tom. iii. pp. 68-102; by Bigot, Palladii De Vita S. Joh. Chry-
sostomi dialogus, 1680, pp. 349-355; and by Galland in his
seventh volume of Bibliotheca Patrum; see also Pilokalia TwV
ἱερων Νηπτικών, 1782, fol. pp. 41 and 46ff. Ὑποτύτωπις μοναχικὴ
διδάσκουσα πῶς δεῖ ἀσκεῖν καὶ ἡσυχάζειν and Κεφάλαια περί
διακρίσεως παθῶν καὶ λογισμῶν.
* I. c., to the service in the church.
2 Read So.
3 I. e., the space on the right and left above the three steps
leading to the choir. See supra, pp. 342, 431.
<pb n="499"/>
CHAPTER IX.
OF THE SUBLIME KINDS OF PRAYER WITH WHICH HE
ENRICHED HIS SOUL.
Among all the virtues cultivated by holy men' there
is none greater and more excellent than the wonderful
work of prayer, for prayer maketh the pure mind at
one with God, and maketh the whole man a deified
and spiritual being. It removeth him that giveth him-
self continually to it from earth, and from the anxious
care which is upon it; it made the Prophets to be
victorious; it sanctified the Apostles; it entered with
the Martyrs into every kind of contest, and by it they
conquered the threats of kings and terrible torments;
it made them like asbestos' before the fire, and they
became like wood and creatures without feeling under
the various tortures of every [kind of] affliction; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="274"/>
and it protected the recluses, and anchorites, and
ascetics in desert places, which were full of every [kind
of] harmful assaults of devils, and evil animals, and
noxious reptiles. For when our Lord Jesus, the Cause of
the redemption of our nature, walked upon earth on our
behalf in the days of His dispensation, ³ and was teaching,
and commanding, and exhorting the keeping of all the
virtues which are in His Gospel with His living mouth,
He shewed forth in His own Person the effectual
* Read, with BC,
op.
3 JITION, duíavтoç. See Payne Smith, Thes., col. 230;
Duval, Lexicon, col. 186; and compare Ahrens, Das Buch
der Naturgegenstände, No. 117, p. 80 (text p. 63).
37. e., His incarnation. See Hoffmann, Kirchenversammlung
von Ephesus, p. 94, note 184.
<pb n="500"/>working of prayer, going at one time to the mountain
desert [by day], and at another to a solitary wilderness
to pass the night alone, so that by His immunity from
the sounds and sights which confuse the understanding,
and by His solitude, He might assist [His] occupation
in divine things. On account of this the holy fathers
the monks were more anxious about this than any other
virtue, and they have taught us to do as they did.
for the blessed Mark' the monk saith, "Being men
subject to passions it is meet that we subject ourselves
to prayer; he that subdueth himself with the subjection
of prayer is a wise athlete, for by means of his
remoteness from things which can be felt by the senses,
he sheweth forth openly the strife which is hidden."
And again he saith, "There is nothing so powerful to
help as prayer, and there is nothing which profiteth
like unto it in respect of the Will of God, for it
containeth the whole doing of the commandments; the
prayer which is without wandering' is a sign of the
love of God to him that endureth patiently." And
again the holy Evagrius saith, "We are not commanded
to watch and fast at all times, but that we should pray
continually is a law laid down for us; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="275"/> for
those who would heal the part which is liable to
affections and passions need the labour of the body."
He lived in the Nitrian desert at the close of the IVth
century of our era; for his works which are extant see B. O.,
iii. i. p. 45; and Wright, Catalogue Syriac MSS. p. 1306.
2 Or distraction.
3 Compare "Nocte et die laborat monachus vigilans, in
orationibus permanens: pungens autem cor suum producit lacry-
mas, et celerius provocat Dei misericordiam." Rosweyde, Vitae
Patrum, p. 566, No. 17.
<pb n="501"/>
And again the blessed Abbâ Macarius, on being asked
by the brethren, "Which of the labours of the ascetic
life hath a reward?" answered thus:-"There is nothing
more sublime than the continuing in prayer. To the
very end the devils will wish to abolish [prayer], for
they know that their artifices' are made of none effect
thereby.” And the holy Abbá Isaiah places endurance
in prayer above all the glorious acts of the ascetic life,
and thus also saith the blessed Expositor in his book
on the Mysteries, 3 "Every prayer that is [made] is a
teaching concerning life to every one who is careful
and knoweth [how] to regard that which is fitting."
And again he saith, "Let him that is solicitous for [a life
of] excellence, and is careful to do those things which
please God, have anxious regard unto prayer more
than unto any [other] thing; for it is manifest that the
man who is not careful for even one virtue, and is not
anxious to do those things which please God, will also
be sluggish in respect of prayer." Wherefore also the
holy Rabban Mâr Elijah, to whose noble deeds we
bring back our simple narrative, aiming at the mark
of the holy fathers, or rather having already entered
into the experience of its efficacy, and felt through it
all the hidden treasures [which are] hidden in the Books
of the Spirit, knew and understood that without it a
Iman was not able to be perfect in the service of the.
ascetic life. And he yoked himself to it from the
"Dum enim voluerit homo orare Deum suum, semper
inimici daemones festinant interrumpere orationem ejus, scientes
quia ex nullâ re impediuntur, nisi per orationem fusam ad Deum".
Rosweyde, Vitae Patrum, p. 613, No. 2.
21. e., Theodore of Mopuestia.
3 See B. O., iii. i. p. 33.
<pb n="502"/>beginning of his going into the cell, and he joined to
it bodily labours and the concentration of the mind,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="276"/> having learned from the blessed Mark the
monk, that every prayer in which the body hath not
laboured is accounted to be an abortion' and imperfect
in its bodily form. And because these two fierce
contentions resist the man who has yoked his mind to
the concentration which is in prayer, that is to say,
disturbed wandering of the mind, and vacillating per-
plexity, Elijah was armed mightily, for he listened to the
blessed Evagrius, who said, "If thou hast overcome the
wandering of the mind, the aim of all aims, thou art
worthy of perfection." Now concerning the pious and
holy man [Mâr Elijah]. Mår Abraham the Catholicus told
me that he had made himself accustomed to live in a
dark spot in his cell, and that in it he used to perform
all his seasons of prayer. And to every verse of the
psalm which he said he joined a "Hallelujah! Glory
be to Thee, O God," in such a way that his mind was
compelled to think about the verse which was coming
next and that he might not be distracted in prayer.
And he used to do this so that by reason of [his] too
ready facility in calling the verse to mind, it might
not be too easy for his mind to wander during his
prayers, and to forget the verse which should follow,
and that when, at the end of every verse, the mouth
followed with, "Hallelujah! Glory be to Thee, O God,"
his mind might be compelled to make [one] verse follow
the other in proper order. And because without the
concentration of the mind divine intuition doth not give
itself to the understanding so that the understanding
* Read A
.ܘܢܫܝܘܗ̈ܝ Read 1
<pb n="503"/>
may enter into the bosom of a divine intuition and the
ascetic cannot find the shadowless Galilee,' he made his
understanding prepared for seeing [God], even as one
of the saints saith, "The moon is not equal in all its
periphery except at full moon," and he asked those
who observe the mind by prayer if there were any
corners in their country.³ And because it hath been
said by the holy fathers <pb type="textAllignment"  n="277"/>, “One word near is
better than a thousand afar off," he cared less about
the quantity of the Psalms [which he sang] than for
the doubling of the riches and concentration of the
thoughts which were in his mind, and it was super-
fluous to him that others said the psalter of David
twice in a day and night, while their minds were
building up, and hiding, and judging, and con-
demning, and buying, and selling. Such were the
advantages which this most praiseworthy man learned
for himself, who although he was little cultivated in
the Scriptures, and only [knew] the psalms, and responses,
and the ordinary lessons for the day, yet included alls
the commandments in one [act, viz.,] voluntary renun-
ciation of every thing, and the crucifixion of the mind
against all [disturbing] thoughts. And when by means
of great wrestling after many years he was freed from
this defect of wandering [in prayer], he cleansed and
purified his heart, and from this time and onward he
* The allusion is to St. Matthew xxviii. 10, 16; St. Mark
xvi. 7.
I. ., he asked the angels to tell him of his shortcomings.
3 7. e., if there were any inequalities to be observed from
the places where they stood.
We must read oop.
.ܕܠܟܠܗܘܢ We should perhaps read 5
<pb n="504"/>forsook the first step of the ascetic life, and he changed
his manner of life to the singing of psalms without
ceasing, being silent neither day nor night. For the
holy Mar Abraham, who more than any was acquainted
with every thing concerning him, told me that even
when he was wearied in sleep his mouth was not silent,
but was singing psalms audibly, and that whilst his
soul was answering with secret hallelujahs, his mouth
sang psalms as he dreamed. And as that holy soul
was [engaged] in all the spiritual and external service
of the Spirit, and was dwelling in that aged and ascetic
body, that strife which existed between the spirit and
the flesh, and the flesh and the spirit, ceased, and his
two natures (lit. manhoods) were swallowed up in the
desire for the happiness of the life which is to come.
And in proportion as the body languished, and his
labour became <pb type="textAllignment"  n="278"/> less, his soul was lifted up to
heaven on the wings of the spirit, as the holy Abba
Isaiah wrote, saying, "The soul' that hath walked
worthily by the might of Christ, and hath departed.
from [this] world, delighteth itself in these countries
whither pinions incapable of sufferings have borne it."
CHAPTER X.
OF THE ELECTION OF THE HOLY MAR ELIJAH TO BE
BISHOP OF MOĶÂN A CITY OF THE BARBARIANS.
There is a certain city called Môķân, which is
[situated] in a country to the north-east, near to the
Read .
See B. O., iii. i. p. 492, col. 1.
<pb n="505"/>
border of the peoples of Dailôm, and its inhabitants
are barbarians, and they worship dumb animals. Now
when the pious Mâr Timothy had anointed and sent
the holy Metropolitans Mâr Yabhlâhâ and Ķardagh to
Gîlân and Dailôm, he wisely determined that he would
appoint to the city of Môķân also a shepherd and
prosperous husbandman to cultivate the rational souls
that were therein, which had been led captive by the
Calumniator from days of old. And because he knew
by experience, and had found out in very deed that
men of might and athletes of valour had gone forth
from the divine congregation of the holy Mâr Jacob,
and because from these men Mâr Catholicus had
appointed fitting persons to all regions and cities [of
the world], and because by them wonderful acts of
power and glorious cures' had been made manifest,
he chose from this stock to send to that city also a rod
of power as out of Zion,* <pb type="textAllignment"  n="279"/> that he might obtain
dominion over the demons and devils which were in
that wretched city, [where] the sore of destruction had
spread abroad. And because he had heard about the
extraordinary manner of life of the blessed Elijah, he
wrote a letter to him with love and patience, 3 like a
wise father to a son who can be easily persuaded,
[telling him] to come down to him and he would
appoint him Bishop of the city of Môķân. And the
pious Elijah answered, saying, "I cannot receive con-
secration except in the holy temple in which I am, and
* The MSS. have but read
2 Psalm cx. 2.
3
patiently, but C and Vat. have incitanter,
which is probably the better reading.
sss
<pb n="506"/>I would that this [rite] be performed upon me on the
holy first day of the week of Pentecost," [wishing] in
his simplicity that [he might receive the rite] on the
day in which the blessed Apostles received the gifts
of the Holy Spirit. And although the time which Mâr
Elijah appointed [appeared] to be afar off to the
quickened readiness of the Catholicus, Mâr Timothy
put off the time until the day of Pentecost, and he
wrote to the pious Nestorius, Metropolitan of Adiabene,
who came here (2. e., to Bêth Âbhe) and ordained Mâr
Elijah in this temple according to his will; and Mâr
Elijah went down to Mår Timothy who confirmed him,
and sent him off with certain merchants who were
going into the countries in which Môķân was situated.
And the blessed Mar Abraham the Catholicus related
to me concerning him, that instead of a cross on his
neck he used to hang upon his breast a complete Book
of the Gospels in a small size; and he took with him
a cross of brass which, when he required to sing the
psalms where he passed the night, he placed on the
top of the staff which was in his hand, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="280"/> and
he used to drive it into the ground in front of him
and pray, and in this manner he acted when he was
travelling in terrible places. Now when he was going
along the road with the merchants in several companies,
and he was following at some distance behind that
he might have an opportunity of [singing] a psalm, a
certain man had a mule which he was [trying] to keep
close to the other animals (now this mule had a heavy
load upon his back), and when he was going up through
a high, rough and rocky pass, his foot slipped off the
See B. O., iii. I. p. 493, col. 1.
<pb n="507"/>
rugged rock, and the hoof of his foot was wrenched off
and put out of its place. And when the holy Mâr
Elijah came up to the man and asked him the reason
of his staying behind his companions, behold he wept,
and cried and rent his garments, and shewed the
spiritual physician the hoof of his animal which had
fallen off. Now because that holy old man in the time
of his old age made use of olive oil with his dry crust
by reason of the cold and feebleness which had fallen
upon his stomach through [eating] dry bread and salt,
he had with him in his cloak a phial of oil. And he
answered and said to the owner of the mule, "Weep
not, my son, neither be mournful, for God will heal
thy mule easily." And he said to him, "Bring me the
hoof," and he took it, and poured upon it [some of]
the oil for his food, and salt of wild thyme' which he
ate, and he laid it upon the leg of the mule, and made
the sign of the Cross over it, and said to the man,
"Lead on quickly in the name of the Lord, that he
may not remain behind his companions;" thus he
bestowed healing on the animal and joy upon his
master. And this was known to all that company of
people which was journeying with him into that country,
and they praised <pb type="textAllignment"  n="281"/> and confessed the mighty
power of Christ by Whose disciples sicknesses were
healed without medicines and without drugs.
* See supra, p. 497, note 1.
<pb n="508"/>CHAPTER XI.
OF THE GOING IN OF THE BLESSED MÂR ELIJAH TO THE
CITY OF MÔĶÂN, AND OF HIS PREACHING IN IT, [AND
OF HIS RETURN TO THIS MONASTERY, AND OF THE
END OF HIS LIFE].
Now when by the hand of God his helper the holy
Mâr Elijah arrived at that city of the heathen, and
went into it, and saw that the name of God, the Lord
of all, and confession of Him did not exist therein at
all, but that all the people that were in it offered up
worship to dumb. trees and senseless stones, and that
it was destitute even of the Arabs and Jews who confess
One God, the Creator of heaven and earth, he offered
up prayer ceaselessly to Christ our Lord on their be-
half, that He, Who according to the custom of His
graciousness and longsuffering had brought all nations
to the worship of His Godhead, might by his means,
as by the hand of the Apostles, give to those people
a new heart and a new spirit, that they might despise
the images and senseless forms which they worshipped,
and be converted to the knowledge of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. And together
with all these [prayers] which he made on their behalf
he bore suffering in his heart, and he placed the cross
which [he had] with him upon the top of the staff
which was in his hand, and during the whole day he
went round about in the streets and lanes' of the whole
city, and preached to the inhabitants with a loud voice,
The Urmi New Testament of 1846, p. 234, col. I. (St. Luke
xiv. 21) has
<pb n="509"/>
saying, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="282"/> “O men, who have erred from the true
knowledge of God, God the Lord of all hath sent me
to you to turn you from the error in which ye live.
Ye have served enough those things which from their
nature are not gods, for without knowledge, and by
the agency of daring devils, have ye offered the
worship which was due to your Lord to the trees
which the earth maketh to grow up for your honour."
And having gone round and about the whole day in
this preaching of Life, every evening he used to go
forth outside the city, and fix the cross [upon his staff],
and sing the service for the night and pray until dawn;
and when it was morning, and they opened the gates,
and [the people] came forth, and saw that he sat
openly before the cross they marvelled and were
astonished. Now in those days when he came to them,
according to the Divine command and the curse of
Jeremiah, the evening wolves gained the mastery over
them, and all persons who were left outside the [city]
wall were devoured mercilessly. And the people having
compassion upon him said to the blessed man, "Pass
the night with us inside the wall that the wolves devour
thee not."
" And he answered and said to them, "The
God Whom I serve will protect me from the wolves;"
and this [thing] became to them a great wonder. And
when he had tilled, and ploughed, and thrown up [the
furrows], and cast the grains of the living wheat of the
doctrine of our Lord into their ears, and had covered
them up and made [the ground] smooth, he did not gather
from them the fruit which he expected, but at one time
they mocked at him, and at another they laughed at
* Jeremiah v. 6.
<pb n="510"/>him. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="283"/> Then the good and merciful God Who
saw his labour and toil on their behalf, brought upon
them the sickness which is called "Shar ûța", and their
bodies were smitten with ulcers and tumours. And
when Mâr Elijah saw them in the depth of their infir-
mity and saw that they were nigh unto death, he demand-
ed from them that [in return for] the healing of their
bodies, [they should] worship his God, and they by
reason of the affliction which they were suffering
promised, saying, "We will do this at once, and we
will become servants of that God Who is able to give
us healing, and we will cast aside all our [present] objects
of worship, and elect Him [in their stead]." And he
blessed the oil [taken] from the phial which he had
upon him, and by prayer, and the sign of the Cross,
and the making mention of the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, he healed them all. Now when
they were healed of this sickness by the grace of
God, and they had seen³ the mighty deeds and
miracles which [Mâr Elijah] worked among the sick,
and the devils which he drove out of many [people],
their hearts were softened to hearken unto his doctrine.
And he began to speak before them concerning God,
3 Compare bill blueball B. O., iii. 1.
p. 437, col. 2, 1. 7; Baethgen, Fragmente, pp. 36, 37; Wright,
Joshua the Stylite, pp. 17, 19; Bar-Hebraeus, Hist. Dynastiarum,
pp. 93, 95, 96, 182; Bar-Hebraeus, Chron., ed. Bruns, p. 85,
ܩܪܝܠܝܢ ܕܐܬܦܠܛܘ ܡܢ ܡܘܬܐ ܕܒܥܬܵܐ܆ ܒܡܚܘܝܐܝܐ 22 l. 3, Bedjan, .p. 80, L
,.and Payne Smith, Thes ܕܪܒܘܒܝܐ ܕܗܝ ܒܪܢܪܒܝܢܘܣ: ܐܘܟܝܬ ܫܪܥܘܬܐ
col. 452. Brit. Mus. MS. Rich 7203, fol. 190a, col. I, explains
.ܪܚܙܘ Read 3
الطاعون وهو الورم the word by
2 Read
See B. O., iii. I. p. 493, col. 2.
<pb n="511"/>
the Lord of all, and concerning the coming of our
Lord Christ into the world, and they were converted
by his words, and by the love of his God, and they
answered him with one voice, saying, "We have Yazd,
whom our grandfathers, fathers and ourselves have
worshipped, and we are afraid of the injuries which
he may do unto us, lest peradventure when we deny
him, he may destroy our lives. If, however, thy God,
in Whom thou hast made us to place our trust-for He
is [God alone], and there is none other besides Him,
and we also have chosen to be His servants and
worshippers-is able to slay and destroy him, behold
then we are before thee like matter before the handicrafts-
man, and it is in thy power to do with us according
to thy will." <pb type="textAllignment"  n="284"/> Now the holy Mâr Abraham
told me-even as if he were standing before God the
Lord of all, with His holy angels as witnesses, and
I set down [here] his words without alteration-that
when those people had said this to the blessed man,
he answered and said to them, "Where is this Yazd,
the son of a whore, whom ye and your fathers have
served?" And they went with him and shewed him
from the top of a hill a mighty oak tree, situated in
a valley, which was called the "chief of the forest,"
and which owing to length of time and the care with
which they had tended it, had grown to a great height,"
and had acquired great breadth in its girth, and great
density of foliage. And he asked for an axe, and
they brought him [one], and he girded up his loins, and
* See Loew, Aram. Pflanzennamen., No. 9, p. 41; and
Payne Smith. Thes., col. 41.
2
Literally "held the height of heaven by its stature."
3 Literally "strength."
<pb n="512"/>rolled up the sleeves of his tunic, and he took the
axe like a warrior, and went down to the tree, more
especially, however, against the devil which dwelt.
therein, and lifting up his voice in the courage of his
confidence, saying, "The voice of the Lord moveth
the hinds to calve, and uprooteth the trees of the
forest," he lifted up his axe and brandished it against
the tree. And he did it a second time, and a third
time, and the tree fell, and he hewed down all its
ancient strength and thickness with three strokes of
the axe; and he smote and cut down also the rest of
the branches which were round about it, and which
those erring people called the "children of Yazd." And
he lifted up his voice, and with his hand he made
signs to those people to come down to him, and they
did so, and they gathered together reeds, and pieces
of bramble and pieces of dry wood, and laid them on
the tree and upon its branches, and burnt them up,
and thus the error of that devil ceased. And they all
lifted up their voices and glorified God Who had made
the blessed Mar Elijah to preach to them, as did those
[men] who in the days of Elijah the Prophet mocked
at Baal and destroyed all his priests;³ <pb type="textAllignment"  n="285"/> in that
case heathen priests were destroyed, and in this case false
gods, which by the error of their reproof made devils
to abound to the destruction and annihilation of those
who were obedient unto them. And after the burning
of their images of accursed devils they all went up to
that city, being glad and rejoicing in the victory which
the soldier of Christ, who had been sent for the con-
· version and life of their souls, had wrought. And they
all began to build the glorious building of a church,
* 1 Kings xviii.
Psalm xxix. 9.
<pb n="513"/>
and Mår Elijah ordered it with all its arrangements,
and he baptized many of them, and ordained them
priests and deacons, and he wrote out psalms for them,
and taught them the responses, and thus little by little
they became virtuous, and increased, and the grace of
Christ grew and dwelt in them. And they received
the conviction in their hidden nature that they were
in very truth converted from error to the light of life,
and they laid fast hold upon the ordinances of the
seasons of prayer, and the receiving of the Holy
Mysteries, and they were sanctified in their manner of
life, and the sun of the mind of God shone upon them,
Who called them and brought them near, and made
them members of His household. And when they were
confirmed in their hope, and had become members of
the household of this man in all the ordering of the
Christians, that blessed man praised and glorified [God],
and gave thanks unto our Lord, that the first seed
which he had sowed in his plot of ground had come
up in seed buds,' and had given birth to ears, and
had produced wheat and a granary full of wheat and
grain. And when he had tarried with them for many
years, the holy man was minded to come to this
'
, a rare word.
2 The MSS. have Solo, but this must be a mistake for
and a heap of winnowed wheat and com stored ܘܐܘܠܕ ܚܕܝܺܬ݂ܐ
up in subterranean pits." Compare described by
Wetzstein in Delitzsch, Commentary on the Book of Job, Edin-
burgh 1876, vol. ii. p. 152. For the word 2 or 2 (which
Nöldeke derives from a root + Eth. Me: [Dillmann, Lex.
Aethiop., col. 720] to collect, gather together,) see Payne Smith,
Thes., col. 65; Duval, Lexicon, col. 62; and for see Payne
Smith, Thes., col. 1200, at the top.
ttt
<pb n="514"/>country to worship in the holy monastery of the house
of his fathers, and to return. And when he had done
this, and had come here, he shewed to all his brethren
the conversion of those erring nations which, by his
hands, had been converted to life and redemption, and
how he had built for them a church, and how he had
baptized and sanctified them, and [how] they had become
participators <pb type="textAllignment"  n="286"/> in his joy in divine gratitude for
these things. And Mâr Jacob the Bishop of the country
of Margâ, came to this monastery with certain well-
known believers of this country, and he and the whole
assembly of monks entreated him not to leave this
country to return there before he had gone round
about through it, and had blessed its inhabitants, and
healed the sick, and visited the smitten that were in
it; and certain old and venerable brethren of the con-
gregation were appointed to go round about with him
from village to village. And the pious Bishop Jacob
wrote to all the believers, saying, “Behold I have
entreated the pious and holy Mâr Elijah, Bishop of
Môkân, the strenuous soldier of virtue and the doer
of mighty deeds, to go forth and round about among
all the villages which ye inhabit that ye may be blessed
by his holiness. Now therefore any one of you who
hath any [cause for] judgment, or who wisheth to
receive the laying on of hands for grades of the Holy
Church, hath the power to settle the idle matters of
his contention before Mâr Elijah and to receive eccles-
iastical ordination." And the venerable old man Sergius
said to me, "I was one of those who accompanied
him from the monastery, and when all the believing
1. e., to Bêth 'Abhê.
<pb n="515"/>
men heard [of him] they came out to meet us from
a great distance, and they brought us into their churches
with service and honour, and a great crowd accompanied
us from one village to another; and he healed and
made whole the sick and the afflicted, and cast out
devils by the word of his mouth. And heathen and
Jews came to be blessed by him, and by his means
the <pb type="textAllignment"  n="287"/> praise of God increased in the mouth of
the inhabitants of this country who saw the sick that
were made whole, and the deaf and the dumb who
heard and spake." Now of all his wonders and
mighty deeds which he wrought in this country I can
only describe and write down one or two, but from
these the reader will understand concerning all the mighty
deeds of his wonderful acts and boldness of speech'
with Christ Who made him victorious. And that trust-
worthy old man Sergius, who went about with him
through the whole country said, "He never sat upon
an ass during the whole [time] of our going round
about through this country. Now he acted thus all
his life, for he walked upon his feet at an easy pace,
and a psalm was never absent from his mouth. And
at the words "Glory be to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Ghost," which [came] between each
marmitha, he used to bow down and prostrate himself
from the infinitive лаppησáσa; see Payne
Smith, Thes., col. 3242.
The Psalter is divided into fifteen, and each
into four 15, and each 25ex into three or four psalms. See
Lagarde, Praetermissorum, p. 100. 38; Dietrich, Comment. de
Psalterii usu publico et divisione, p. 9; B. O., iii. 1, p. 529.
Bickell, Conspectus, p. 88. Unicuique marmithae oratio praefi-
gitur et Gloria Patri annectitur.
<pb n="516"/>to the ground as a mark of honour, and he did not
refrain from this even when he was [walking] upon
stones, or briars or any other [thorny] growth, and at
every place [in the psalm] where he ought to say the
Gloria, he bowed down until he touched the ground
with his head. Now when he had arrived at the city of
Shaḥrai, the people saw him and came forth to meet
him from this village, and they begged and entreated
him to go into the house of a poor Arab woman who
was afflicted with an evil devil, and pray for her, and
he did so. And when we had gone in he commanded
me to say, 'Peace', and he himself prayed and made
the sign of the cross before the woman, who was in
great affliction and was beaten so mightily by that
devil that four women were [obliged to] Hold her and
to kneel upon her that the devil might not break her
to pieces with the blows <pb type="textAllignment"  n="288"/> and beatings with
which he rent her. Now the devil through the mouth
of that woman began [to give utterance] in the Arabic
tongue to wicked blasphemies and horrible abuse of
the blessed man. And since he wore hung round his
neck the Book of the Gospels instead of a cross",
(even as I have written in a preceding passage'),
"he brought it forth from his bosom, and laid it on the
breast of that woman, at the same time anathematising
and adjuring the devil to come forth from that woman.
And when the devil had acted with great insolence,
and had contended against the command of the holy
man, now the holy man was ordering him to depart
from her with quietness,-his answers began to fail
little by little. And he answered in the Arabic tongue
See supra, p. 506.
<pb n="517"/>
and said to the blessed man, "Where dost thou com-
mand me to go, O bishop?" And the blessed man
answered and said to him, "For the sake of our Lord,
thou wilt not be restrained until thou goest to Harran,
and moreover, by the word of our Lord thou art bound
not to return to this woman again." And as the entire
village being gathered together, was listening to the
words of the holy man, and the answers of that devil
to his speech, the devil began to go forth from her,
and he cried out in Arabic, saying, "Ho," let us go
to Harran, ho, let us go to Harran," many times, "the
road is before us, let us go to Harran." And we heard
his voice as he cried out in the air, going towards
the west, for a long time, and [then] little by little his
voice died away and became inaudible to us in the
distance. And fear and trembling laid hold upon all
those that were there, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="289"/> and they began to
glorify Christ and to magnify his servant the blessed
Mår Elijah; and that woman received a complete
cure, and she confessed the power of Christ, and
lived freed from the attacks of the devil a life of
gratitude to Christ our Lord, and she proclaimed,
"There is no true belief except among the holy
Christian people."
And again, another woman entrusted an exceedingly
valuable pledge to a neighbour, and when she demand-
ed it back from her she denied her, saying, "Thou
hast never given any pledge to me, and I cannot pay
15. See Hoffmann, Syr. Arab. Gloss.,
No. 3251, p. 116; Duval, Lexicon, col. 599; Neubauer, The Book
of Hebrew Roots, p. 178, note 32.
2
هُوذَا نَذهب الى حَرّان الطريق من قدامِنَا :
<pb n="518"/>it back." And the defrauded woman drew nigh to
this blessed man, and he sent and called the other
woman, and said to her, “Behold, the pledge which
thy neighbour gave thee is lying in such and such a
place in thy house, bring it hither, and defraud her
not lest the anger of the Lord come upon thee;" and
when she saw that she was made a mockery, she at
once returned to that woman the things which be-
longed to her, that she might not be exposed in
other matters also. Now very many other things
were wrought by the holy man which I need not take
the trouble to write down, because I only wish to
receive some small blessing from the glorious deeds
of these holy men, and to pass on. And when he
had gone round about throughout all this country, and
had been blessed in his holy steps and had made judicial
decisions, and ordained priests and deacons, he came
into this monastery. Now when God the Lord of all
saw his troubles and afflictions, and the length of his years,
and the greatness of his age, in order that he might
not die in exile, far away from the house of his fathers,
like the blessed Moses whom He buried on Mount
Nebo <pb type="textAllignment"  n="290"/> that he might not be disturbed by the war
of the Canaanites, and the slaughter of insolent kings,
He willed that this blessed man also should rest from
a life full of anxiety and care; and he fell sick of a
slight ailment, and so departed from [this] temporary
life to the enjoyment of everlasting life. And our
holy father Mar Abraham the Catholicus told me, saying.
"While many of us were gathered together about him
at the hour of his departure, he sat and spake with
* Deuteronomy xxxii. 48-50.
<pb n="519"/>
us concerning his separation from us. And he com-
manded us to say the response of baptism [which runs],
"The doors of the spiritual marriage chamber are
opened for the absolution of men," while he sat with
his hands laid upon his knees. And when we had
come [to the passage] "Enter in then ye that are called
to the joy which hath been prepared for you," he open-
ed his mouth three times [to join in the singing], and
his soul departed from his body with the joy which
was prepared for him. And marvelling we understood
that he actually saw and beheld with the hidden eye
of his mind the happiness which had been prepared
for him, and that it was because of this he had asked
us to sing this baptismal response, and that the rest
and happiness which is laid up for the righteous baptiz-
ed firstborn whose [names] are written³ down in heaven
had assumed a visible form. And he was buried with
great ceremony and honour by all the congregation of
* The passage reads, "Open unto me the gates of righteous-
ness The gates of heaven are opened. The gates of the
spiritual chamber of the Bridegroom are opened for the for-
giveness of the sins of men, and through the gift of the Spirit
from on high mercy and peace are now vouchsafed to all
mankind. Enter in, therefore, O ye who are called; enter into
the joy which is prepared for you, and with pure and sanctified
hearts, and true faith, give thanks unto Christ our Saviour.
Glory be to the Father, etc. O Thou true Door, open to the
lost, and call us to enter Thy treasury on high." See Badger,
Nestorians and their Rituals, vol. ii. p. 196; Denzinger, Ritus
Orientalium, Ritus Matrimonii apud Nestorianos, p. 419ff.
2 The allusion is to the words, "In the Jerusalem above,
before the seat of Christ, there may the names of Thy servants
be written." See Badger, Nestorians, vol. ii. p. 211.
<pb n="520"/>his sons and brethren, and he was laid with the rest
of the Bishops and Metropolitans who were before him
in the martyrium of this monastery; and is made ready
for him with those who are of like rank and garb the
enjoyment of heaven, namely the just and righteous in
whose footsteps he walked, and in whose manner of
life he triumphed. Glory be to Christ our Lord Who
made him victorious, and may mercy be shewn upon
us sinners by his prayers in this world, and may we
participate in his enjoyment in that which is to come,
Amen.*
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="291"/>
CHAPTER XII.
THE HISTORY OF THE BLESSED MÂR NARSAI (NARSES),
BISHOP OF THE CITY OF SHENNA.*
Now every spiritual gift cometh down from above
from the Father of lights, according to the words of
the divine James in the Catholic Epistle,³ and the light
which shineth upon our holy temples beareth the mark
of spiritual knowledge, according to the affirmation of
Evagrius the spiritual philosopher, and according to
David, the prophet of the Spirit who said to God,
"Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto
.ܐܡܝܢ Read ܃
I. e., Shennâ dhé Bêth Rammân, the Sinn Bârimma of
the Arabs, i. e., Ķârdâlîàbhadh, a town distant ten farsaḥ from
Tekrit on the east bank of the Tigris. See Hoffmann, Auszüge,
p. 189.
3 St. James i. 17.
<pb n="521"/>
my path," and the Lord of the Prophets and Apostles
stated definitely that He was 'the Light of the world',*
and that, even as the Scriptures say, "Rivers of living
water should flow from the belly"s of whomsoever be-
lieveth in Him. It is well known then that all the holy
men who were authors of works upon the healthful
doctrine of orthodoxy, whether of history, or doctrine,
or prayer, or admonition, have drunk from the abundant
streams of the sweetness of the Gospel, which like the
breath of life is placed for the cooling of their bitter-
ness. And they have filled the Church with the spiri-
tual light of the glorious rays of their understanding,
and they have enlightened the assemblies of its children,
and they have made them to know and to understand
that while they make use of those footsteps they must
set their own feet in the paths which lead to the height
above, where Christ our Lord sitteth on the right hand
[of God], and maketh intercession for them, although
they do not actually make perfect this ascent except
by mysteries and types. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="292"/> And I also, who am
subject to all passions, have been obliged through the
entreaty of many to write down also the history of
the blessed and holy Mâr Narses, Bishop of the city
of Kardilabhadh,5 which is Shennâ dhe Bêth Rammân,
and to teach it together with those of the holy men
his companions. And because I am a man lacking all
wisdom, from the Light, the Father of light, according
to the words of the holy and wise Dionysius, I ask for
a gift and the bestowal of power, to enable me to
Psalm cxix. 105.
3 St. John vii. 38.
5 For Kârdâliabhadh.
2 St. John viii. 12.
.ܕܛܘܒܢܐ Read ܀
uuu
<pb n="522"/>speak' and to enter into the sanctuary of the vic-
torious deeds of the holy man concerning whom our
speech hath made ready to praise. And I beg and
entreat that as He hath bestowed a gift upon others
to the praise and glorification of His saints, he will
also bestow upon me a sinner, full of hypocrisy through
his hateful deeds, a gift that I may speak, if it be only
in part, concerning some of the noble deeds of the
blessed Mar Narses, the member of His household.
Moreover, I would make known unto those who come
across these histories, that according to what I have
learned from the gentle-souled Eustathius, the Arch-
deacon of the holy Mâr Abraham the Catholicus, at
the time when he and I were deacons of the Catholicus
in the city of the kingdom of the world, after the
death of the elect and holy Mâr Narses, that by the
encouragement of Bûrzâdh³ his father, the head of the
church at Shennâ, he collected the [accounts of] his
noble deeds and sent them to Rabban Ḥabbîbhà, the
teacher of the monastery of Mår Gabriel, that he might
weave them into a crown, and glorify them in a history.
Now Rabban Habbibha having departed from the manner
of diction which historical narrative requireth, composed
an account in metrical discourses which were to be
sung to the 'fourth tone'-a style of composition which
doth not at all aid [the writer] to make known acts
* Read
Aed.
I. e., Seleucia.
3 Probably abbreviated from s Pers. Burzyazd — Burzî-
zad—; compare
text, p. 238, note 5.
4 Thomas of Margâ probably refers to the Monastery of
Mâr Gabriel near Môşul; see B. O., iii. I. pp. 277, 284, 618;
and Hoffmann, Opuscula Nestoriana, p. xxii.
<pb n="523"/>
of piety and persecutions, and moreover this style is ap-
propriate for hymns <pb type="textAllignment"  n="293"/> and for the sweet peni-
tential compositions which are sung to tunes, but not
for history. "And when we had seen it", he saith, "we
rejected it, and we did not miss it, and the leaves
were torn by reason of the lapse of time, and because
it was not suitable we have not copied it into our
book." But I will now set down in writing, for the
gratification of those who have commanded me, some
of the things which I have learned from Eustathius,
and from the monks who lived in the holy Monastery
of Abbá Simon' of Shennâ, but more especially from
the aged monks who were to be found in my days in
the holy monastery of Bêth 'Abhê, and from the Tigris
boatmen and fishermen whom I have seen; and taking
refuge in the prayers of those who told me the stories,
and of those who commanded me to write them, and
of readers, and listeners, I will go into the sweet-smell-
ing garden laid out and cultivated by the holy Mår
Narses, and I will write briefly about him, even as I
have written about his companions, some few matters
to commemorate his holiness.
CHAPTER XIII.
OF THE ORIGIN OF THE BLESSED MAR NARSES AND OF
HIS COMING TO THIS MONASTERY.
There was in the country of Bêth Bĕghâsh* a famous
village called Zârn, the inhabitants of which were
See B. O., iii. I. p. 225, col. 1.
2 See supra, p. 236, note 2.
<pb n="524"/>warriors, and they all were mighty men of valour. Not
only did they pursue thieves, and make raids, but
they also shewed themselves fierce and disobedient to
the royal officers who came to them for the imperial
taxes, and many of them they fearlessly drove away
with blows. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="294"/> From this village then came the
blessed man, whose noble deeds I am about to relate,
and he and his brother whose name was Shalmân, and
his only sister sprang from a family of believers, and
from people who were prosperous as regards the affairs
of this world. And the manner of life of each
brother was as different as that of the blessed
Jacob and of Esau, for Shalmân carried a sword and shed
the blood, not of the good but of wicked men. And
because the Khartĕwâyê' had at that time begun [to
commit acts] of destruction and theft, Shalmân armed
himself, and having gathered together a body of men,
he put an end to many of the Khartěwâyê by cutting
off their heads. And the rumour is reported of him
that every day in which he did not lie down upon the
skull of some malefactor whom he had slain with his
own hands as upon a pillow, his food was without taste
and unpleasant to him. And like Esau he was a man
of the chase and a man of the desert, but his brother,
the holy Narses, elected to live the ascetic life in an
admirable manner, and he firmly stamped into himself
- like the impression on a dînâr-the [qualities] of the
blessed Jacob, gentleness and sweetness, and praise-
worthy obedience to his parents. Now their sister be-
* The Kartaw Kurds, lived in the region to the
west of the Lower Zâb above Arbela; see Hoffmann, Auszüge,
p. 207; and Baethgen, Fragmente, p. 66.
<pb n="525"/>
came the wife of the honourable Shâhdôst' from the
country of Dåsen," who was born³ at Beth Gâwzâ, and
who begat by her the honourable Na'mân, that great
and famous and rich man, who accepted many offices
of government and received dominion over countries
from Zuraik and [from] his fathers [who were] gover-
* Pers. "king's friend;" see supra, p. 262, 1. 6
(text); and Guidi, Nuovo testo, p. 11, 1. 9.
2 See Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 202-207.
3 perhaps, cunae, praesepe.
4. Sadaka bin 'Alîya the freed man of Azd (
زريق بن على بن called aik of Mosul بن على مولى الازد
who ruled over the mountainous district صدقة الازدى الموصلي
between Môșul and Adhôrbâîgân, together with Wagnâ al-Azdî,
did great mischief in Adhôrbâîgân in the time of al-Rashid when,
perhaps A. H. 183, Huzaima bin Hâzim,
who
I drove the Hazars through the gates of the Caucasus and who
fortified Marâga (see Al-Belâdhorî, Liber Expugnationis Regionum
[ed. de Goeje, Leyden 1863], p. 330), was appointed governor of
Adhôrbâîgân to resist his might (see Ibn al-Athîr, tom. vi. p. III;
Tabarî tom. iii. p. 648). Zuraiķ conquered Urmiya, and to-
gether with his brother, built castles there (Belâdhorî, p. 331;
Ibn al-Fakih al-Hamadhânî [ed. de Goeje 1885] p. 284, l. 19).
Zuraik was appointed governor of Armenia and Adhôrbâîgân
by al-Mâmûn, A. H. 209, to fight against Bâbek al-Ḥurramî
, by whom, however, he was vanquished (Tabarî,
tom. iii. p. 1072; Ibn al-Athîr, tom. vi. p. 338). Previous to
A. H. 211, Zuraiķ made war against al-Sayyed bin Anas,
who had been Emir of Mosul and Marga since السيد بن أنس
A. H. 202, and attacked him in that year with 40,000 men and
slew him (Ibn al-Athir, tom. vi. p. 248). Muḥammad bin
Humaid al-Tûsî (web), who had been made Wâlî of Môșul
by al-Mâmûn (see Ibn al-Athir, tom. vi. p. 287; al-Ya'kubî,
Historiae [ed. Houtsma], tom. ii. p. 564) conquered Zuraik on
the Zâb A. H. 212, and compelled him to ask for protection
<pb n="526"/>nors of Môșul and of all the north, and who during the
time of his rule made great gifts to the Church, and
to her children, and to her directors. And when Rabban
Mâr Narses had become a young man, having by the
care and pains taken about him by his parents been
trained in the Holy Scriptures <pb type="textAllignment"  n="295"/> in the church of their
native village, at which time each man turneth to the
right hand or to the left according to the nature which
is implanted in his earthy composition, and sheweth
in his manner of life either nobility or depravity of
nature, he elected to become a disciple [of purity], and
left the house of his fathers, and all the wealth of their
possessions; and he despised the love of brethren and
of relatives, and came to the holy monastery of Bêth
Abhê, and worked in the monastery, as the canons of
the Fathers order; and it came to pass that an ac-
cident happened to the advantage of himself and for
the benefit of the purity of the body with which he
was clothed. Now when he was with the other monks
his companions shaking down the olives from the olive
trees in the large garden of the community, having
gone up into one of the trees he slipped down be-
tween the fork of the branches, and his testicles were
crushed. And he fell into a severe illness and these
members had to be cut off from him altogether, and
and a safe-conduct,
(Ya'ķubî p. 564, l. 18). When Zuraiķ
I came to him he sent him to the court of the Khalifa, who at
once ordered that all the wealth and possessions of Zuraik and of
his family should be confiscated. This order was not, however,
strictly carried out, for Humaid entered into negotiations with
Zuraik's brethren, and part of Zuraiķ's wealth was returned to
his family.
<pb n="527"/>
he became a eunuch." And as it is written concern-
ing this matter by the fathers, and concerning those
who cut off their members, "If [the members] have
been cut off by sickness or by barbarians, the canon
of the Church doth not reject a man, but let him take
upon himself the grades of priesthood, and let him
minister, and this shall become to him the merchandize
of virginity;" and according to that which the wise'
man spake, "Woe to the man that worketh impurity
upon his couch;" and that which the blessed Evagrius
spake warningly, "At the time when [thou art] striving
against impurity, excuse thyself from going to thy friend
when he shall ask thee;" and from the fact that the
fathers commanded us to be remote from the sight of
these members-for by the sight of them the fire of
desire which is implanted within us is stirred up, and
it may happen that we shall not be able to hold our-
selves against the force of passion-by the sickness
which happened³ to him Christ our Lord freed him
from the necessity of handling and touching those parts
which is an absolute loss of chastity. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="296"/> But
perhaps the Divine dispensation arranged beforehand
these things concerning him, so that when afterwards
he should be appointed to act as shepherd to the city
of his flock, he might rest in peace from the sight of
the beautiful things of this world and its losses.
St. Matthew xix. 12.
I. e., Jesus, the Son of Sirach; compare åtko? länd
.15 .cap. xxii ܬܫܘܝܬܐ ܕܥܪܣܗܙ ܘܐܡܪ ܒܢܦܗ ܡܙܘ ܚܙܐ ܠܝ
3 See the extract from Bar-Bahlûl on St. Matthew xix. 12,
quoted by Payne Smith, Thes., col. 234; and Wright, Catalogue
Syr. MSS., p. 568, No. 7, col. 1.
<pb n="528"/>And when he had gone forth from service in the
monastery, he built himself a little cell far away from
the community (which is well known to this day and
in which there still exists an olive tree which the holy
man himself planted), to the east of the monastery,
and below the [Little] Fortress;' and when he had
come to dwell in it, he made himself a place for weep-
ing, and as he regarded himself as living in a grave
he hid himself therein with humility and weeping of
tears. And although he excused himself from the society
of those who wished to increase in virtue by reading
and conversing and singing the Psalms [with him],
yet because he was a neighbour of the holy Mâr
Cyriacus, whose history I have written a little above,"
he visited him, and it was sufficient for him. For they
had been fellow-workers in the monastery, and con-
temporaries; they were the children of one love, for
they were to become the children of one kingdom;³
they were the sons of one monastery, for they were
about to become heads of the monasteries which are
in heaven; one was their communion, for they lived
under one directorship; one was their doctrine, for they
had been made wise by the Master of teachers; fellows
under one yoke were they, for they had both ploughed
the same spiritual furrow; two mighty arms were they
of one body, and two brilliant eyes were they of one
body; and both of them were appointed shepherds of
cities, which are [situated] on the great river Tigris,
See supra, p. 404, note 5.
2 See supra, pp. 414-466.
3 7. e., the kingdom of heaven.
.ܕܬܪܬܝܢ Read ܀
<pb n="529"/>
the one to Bâlâdh, and the other to Shenna. Now
the blessed Narses so devoted himself to solitary
meditation that he was never seen outside his habi-
tation, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="297"/> and for many days according to the
report which I heard handed down from one to another,
he never went out even to his outer chamber;' but
the gain and sweetness from this art with which a
man enricheth and enjoyeth himself is only known and
made manifest to those who have tasted it, and who
have been consumed by the vision of beauty which is
produced from thence. "For quietness of the body,"
saith the blessed Abbâ Isaiah," "begetteth peace of the
mind; for by the peace of the mind, and the keeping
watch upon the body which resulteth [therefrom], and
by prayer and reading, and by the other works of the
ascetic life, the soul acquireth unity with Christ, and
becometh with Him one spirit. Blessed is the man
who endeth his life in such employments, for, being
crowned with diadems of light, as it is said, he enter-
eth into heaven." For living in solitude did not magnify
and glorify the saints³ of the new [dispensation] and
ܠܕܪܘܤܬܗ but read ,ܠܕܪܘܤܬܗ The MSS. have -
3 For quotations from Isaiah the work Περὶ τηρήσεως τοῦ
vóoç in twenty-seven chapters should be consulted. See Piloкalia
των Ιερών Νηπτικον 1872, p. 33 1.
3. Note the construction of the subject with S, which
Thomas of Margâ seems to have copied from Biblical language;
.11 .Revelation ix ܘܢܝܬ ܠܗܘܢ ܡܠܟܐ ܥܠܝܗܘܢ. ܠܡܠܐܟܐ ܙܬܗܘܡܐ compare
See Gesenius, Thesaurus, p. 732, col. 2 (in the middle); Ewald,
Gram., p. 310; Agrell, Supplementa syntaxeos Syriacae, 1834,
p. 132, § 60, and in Appendicula ad supplementa sua Syntaxeos
Syriacae, Greifswalde, 1838, p. 5; Nöldeke, Syr. Gram., § 307;
and Hoffmann, De Hermeneuticis apud Syros Aristoteleis, p. 185,
col. 1. 29 ff.
xxx
<pb n="530"/>the righteous men of the new [dispensation only], so that
they became gods among men, but heathen philosophers
also, before the coming of our Lord, and before the
revelation of His dispensation, gained therefrom the
riches of sublime and glorious knowledge, and they
enriched others [thereby]. Pythagoras' the master of
philosophers, from the experience which he had gained
during a long [interval of] time, said, "Without the
lying fallow of the body in restraint, and the silence
of the tongue from speaking, philosophy can never be
acquired." And he commanded all those who were
being taught in his school to keep silence for five years,
and the entrance to wisdom was taught by him in that
school by hearing and sight only. And the wise man
Homer, having lived in the desert for many years
making his mind to fly about collecting knowledge,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="298"/> arrived at a subtle perception which he re-
ceived through solitude and silence; and by means of
chemicals, and fire, and a furnace he transmuted lead into
silver,³ and brass into gold, and formed precious stones
* Pythagoras, the son of Mnesarchus a merchant or seal
engraver, was born at Samos about B. C. 570. He is thought
to have visited Egypt, Syria, Babylonia and India. The Pytha-
gorean theory of happiness was that it consisted of the science
of the perfection of the virtues of the soul.
I. e., Homer the Poet, who was reputed among the an-
cients to possess a great knowledge of medicine and physical
science. See Fabricius, Bibliothecae Graecae, Hamburg, 1714,
tom. ii. Bk. 2, cap. 6, § 13; and Tiraquellus, De Nobilitate,
Frankfort 1597, tom. I. cap. 31, pp. 133, 138. For Homer
the physician who flourished about the time of Melanthus, King
of the Athenians, see Fabricius, Bibliothecae Graecae, tom. xiii.
Bk. VI. cap. IX.
3 For the theories of Thales, Pythagoras, Empedocles,
<pb n="531"/>
by means of a preparation of herbs, from these com-
mon things [about us], and other things from other
materials. And concerning Plato," who was wiser in
philosophy than all [other men], and who obtained a
splendid reputation among the Athenians, it is said
and written that he built himself a cell in the heart
of the wilderness, beyond the habitation of man, and
that he took the covenant of the blessed Moses, and
Aristotle, Anaxagoras and others upon metals and their alloys,
etc., see Hoefer, Histoire de la Chimie depuis les temps les plus
reculés jusqu'à notre époque, Paris, 1842, tom. i. pp. 65, 108ff.
On the whole subject of ancient Alchemy (✓✓✓UI al-kîmiyâ,
from Gr. χημεία or χημία, which in its tum seems to be derived
from an Egyptian word meaning "preparation of the black),"
see the excellent article Chemie by Hoffmann in Ladenburg's
Handwörterbuch der Chimie (in the Encyklopacdie der Natur-
wissenschaften, Breslau 1884), Bd. XVI. p. 2, pp. 516-530;
Kopp, Beiträge zur Geschichte der Chemie, 1869; and the
article Pierre Philosophale in Migne, Encyclopédie Théologique,
tom. 46, col. 1173.
· Πλάτον δὲ ὁ φιλόσοφος, ἐκ τῶν τὰ περὶ τὴν νομοθεσίαν
wuppenbeis; see Clemens Alexandrinus, Stromata, i. xxv; and
compare the quotation from Numenius the Pythagorean in
Eusebius, Praepar. Evang., xi. 10., at the end (Migne, Patrol.
Cursus. Ser. Graec. tom. xxi. col. 873). Thomas of Margâ
here repeats one of the many mythical stories related of Plato.
Lactantius (Institut. iv. 2) made him travel to the Magi and
Persians; Clemens (Cohortationes 46) made him travel to the
Babylonians, Assyrians, Hebrews and Thracians; others declar-
ed that he was acquainted with the doctrines of Zoroaster and with
Persian magic; but all thesestatements are pure inventions, as
Iwe may see from Brucker, Historia critica Philosophiae a mundi
incunabulis ad nostram usque aetatem deducta, Leipzig, 1742—67,
tom. i. p. 635, and Zeller, Plato and the Older Academy (trans.
by Alleyne and Goodwin), London 1876, p. 14.
ܬܒܐ ܕܐܢܬ a Read
<pb n="532"/>meditated on the verse, "Hear,³ O Israel, the Lord thy
God is One," for three years, until God, the Lord of
all saw his toil and trouble and granted His mercy
unto him, and he wrote, saying, "The God of the Jews
is one in nature, and three in Persons," and behold
this composition on His similarity of nature and unity,
and on the Trinity of Persons and their attributes is
[extant] in the books of the Church. And it is said
concerning him, and written also in another [place],
that once when he was occupied in trying to think
out some speculation concerning created things, he
travailed in [his] mind, and was brought low, and [fell]
into great toil and affliction; but when he had plucked
out his [earthly] desires, and had become aware of
his contemplative power, and had been persuaded from
within, [saying] "Verily I have attained unto some of
it", he remained silent in joy three whole nights and
days without any movement whatever. And the master
of physicians, and the teacher of great doctors,³ Hip-
pocrates the philosopher, by means of all the wisdom
which he received from solitude and silence, penetrat-
ed deeply with his mind sagaciously into the strife'
of mental investigations, and he learned to understand
how the child is nourished in the womb of its
mother. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="299"/> And if upon the heathen who are
aliens, and who are remote from spiritual knowledge,
* Deuteronomy vi. 4.
.ܘܟܕ ܐܬܪ ܪܓܦܬܗ ܩܚܠܦ ܡܬܬܙܝܥܢܘܬܐ Hofmann would read here 2
3pxíaτpoç. See Payne Smith, Thes., col. 386.
4 Born at Cos about B. C. 460.
5
does not give very good sense, but we might read
was "by means of."
<pb n="533"/>
God the Lord of all bestowed the wisdom which they
sought after, or by reason of their affliction, or as it
were for the benefit of others by the labour of the
deepest tranquillity and silence and absence from man-
kind, made them glad, how much [more] to the holy
men who keep His commandments, and who train
themselves according to His will by hunger and thirst,
and suffering, and tears, and prayer day and night,
will He give not [only] the wisdom of [this] world,
which they have not sought after, but the kingdom
for which they suffer, and make them to enjoy the
pledge of it here?
Now the holy man Mâr Narses received a gift of
the fruits of a tranquil life which is beloved by all
the fathers, and which is the completion of all excel-
lence, that is to say a constant flowing of tears which
never ceased from him. And an old man from this
monastery whose name was Tûmânâ, whom I have
mentioned in the history of Rabban Cyriacus, told me
that when the blessed Narses came to the congregation
he used to wrap himself up in the covering of his
cap' so that the flowing of his tears might not be
seen; now this was also said of him by the believing
men of Shennâ. And when one of the brethren asked
a certain old man, saying, "How is it, father, that al-
though my soul desireth tears they are not given to
it?" he replied to him, "My son, tears are the land of
promise, for as long as a man is without tears he
journeyeth in the wilderness with the children of Israel;
but when he arriveth at the gift of tears he entereth
I
.See Brit. Mus التسمير, and البيرون البرنس القبع - موجة
MS. Orient. fol. 3266, col. 1.
<pb n="534"/>into the land of promise. And because this great gift,
for which not every man is sufficient, is much needed
for the watching of humility,' <pb type="textAllignment"  n="300"/> a man should
train himself to despise himself and to hold everything
in contempt in such a manner as not to be deprived
of this great wealth and gift." And let him hearken
unto the advice with which the blessed Evagrius ordereth
him, saying, "Even though thou shouldst have a foun-
tain of tears in thy prayer, be not in any wise exalted
in thyself, [thinking] that thou art greater than many
[other men], for thou wilt [only] have received help
from thy prayer [when] thou hast discovered [how] to
confess thy sins with diligence, and to pacify thy Lord
by thy tears. Do not then turn to the passion of
pride that which is the destroyer of the passions, lest
peradventure thou shalt offend the more Him that hath
bestowed grace upon thee; for there are many who
have wept for their sins, but because they have for-
gotten the end and aim of tears they have been smitten
with madness." And the blessed Mark the monk saith,
"If thou hast tears in thy prayer be not lifted up, for
Christ hath drawn near to thine eyes, and thou hast
' Interrogavit frater quidam senem, dicens: Quomodo desi-
derat anima mea lacrymas, sicut audio senes lacrymantes, et
non veniunt, et tribulant animam meam? Et dixit senex: Filii
· Israël post quadraginta annos intraverant in terram repromissionis.
Lacrymae igitur sunt sicut terra repromissionis, ad quas si per-
veneris, jam non timebis bellum. Ita enim vult Deus affligi
animam, ut semper desideret ingredi in terram illam." Ros-
weyde, Vitae Patrum, p. 567, No. 27. "Adversus eum qui te
impugnat, gladium lacrymarum exacue". Rosweyde, op. cit.,
p. 613, No. 5.
2 For ; compare text p. 308, 1. 5.
<pb n="535"/>
obscurely seen the Light." And because in proportion
as the soul is exalted to the height of excellence,
mighty adversaries make attacks upon it, according to
the words of the holy Evagrius, [let a man] spiritually
adorn himself with the deepest humility, and with watch-
fulness of every thing round about him through ab-
straction and contemplative power, lest peradventure
when he conquereth in the war of fornication, he
whom he hath overcome may accidentally ensnare him,
and he be led captive by the Evil One to the cruelty
of wrath, or even if he endure this he fall into the
abyss of envy and anger, or if he be free from these
things he be led astray by avarice and vain-glory. For
it is more difficult to preserve excellence than it is to
labour for it, even as saith a certain holy man, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="301"/> "If
thou shouldst put all the labours of virtue on one side,
and the observance of them on the other, the ob-
servance of them would outweigh them;³ for the glory
of the actions of a man's life and the purity of his heart
are like unto the entrance into the love of his Lord,
and Christ will thus sanctify him to be a pure temple
unto Him." For in this manner doth act that gracious
Lord Who doth not withhold the hire of those who
labour in the garden of His Gospel. And when He
findeth a pure spot He sanctifieth it for the dwelling
of His Will, and crowneth it with the glorious honour
of the revelations of His wonders, and when it is
manifest to His inscrutable wisdom that the hidden
pupils of the eyes of a man, which are within, cannot
be injured by the glorious brightness of the beauties
ييد Read :
3 Put a point after .
.ܘܢܛܘܪܬܐ Read 2
<pb n="536"/>.
of his splendours, He maketh him to be an altar of
His revelations, and He maketh the mind to be a priest
in the holy of holies of the heart,' which is within,
with secret hymns of praise which are akin to the holy
hymns of spiritual beings. And this holy man con-
cerning whom our insipid narrative relates lived in the
enjoyment of such things as these for many years and
excelled; but the time draweth nigh, indeed hath al-
ready come when he must receive the ordination of
the five talents,³ and must administer like a wise ser-
vant the treasures of his master to the members of
the house.
CHAPTER XIV.
OF THE ELECTION OF THE HOLY MÂR NARSES TO BE
BISHOP OF THE CITY OF KARDALÎÂBHADH WHICH IS
SHENNÂ.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="302"/> Now since the spirit of the Prophets is
subject unto Prophets, and [since] revelations conceive
a fulfilment before the time for their being carried out
hath arrived, because they are made manifest and
pointed out by a hand which is of the Holy Spirit,
so also according to the spiritual vision which the
blessed Mâr Cyriacus, Bishop of Bâlâdh, had seen some
years before-as I have made known above-concern-
ing the election of the holy Mår Narses and of many
others, the time drew near and came for him to be
1. Read
p.
2 On the ordination of bishops see B. O., iii. 11. p. 684ff.
3 St. Matthew xxv. 15.
ܐܦ ܐܝܟ Read ܀
<pb n="537"/>
appointed to the direction of the Church. Now he'
was made manifest by the hand of God through the blessed
father, Shubhhâl-Maran, the ascetic and head of the
Monastery of Shennâ, the murder of whom we are
about to describe in this history, and he made known
to those believing men that the Spirit of the Lord
had set apart the holy Mâr Narses, the ascetic from
Bêth 'Abhê, to be a shepherd and governor of their
church. And Christ also urged them through him to
go after him without delay, and they went down to
the pious Mâr Timothy, and made known to him that
he must ordain as their Bishop Rabban Narses the
solitary and ascetic. And Mar Timothy wrote [and
sent] by their hands a canonical letter ordering Mâr
Narses not to dispute the Divine choice, and when
this blessed man had read it, and saw that in any
case he was bound and compelled to appear before
the Patriarchal throne, he assented to the Divine Will
and departed with them, and was consecrated by the
Patriarchal hands and by the prayers of the chief priests,
and he was reckoned like Matthias³ in the series and
company of the priests of the Church.
How very
fitting is it to introduce in this place the Divine word
which was spoken by the Lord to the holy prophet
Zechariah, saying, "Take of [them of] the captivity,
[even] of Huldi (Heldai), of Țubhyâ (Tobijah), and of
Idha'ya (Jedaiah), and go into the house of Josiah the
son of Zephaniah, who hath come from Babylon; take
his silver and his gold, and make a crown and put
[it] on the head of Îsho bar-Yôzâdhâk, the high priest."
I. c., Narses.
3 Acts i. 23.
2 Read.
4 Zechariah vi. 10.
ууу
<pb n="538"/><pb type="textAllignment"  n="303"/> Now when [Mår Narses] had gone into his
city, and had been received with the ceremony and
honour of which his piety was worthy, the city of Shenna
became enviable' in the sight of the other cities, and
[it was] as if the psalm of the blessed David had been
said of them, "The Lord hath multiplied to do these
[things] for us," and they had answered, "The Lord
hath multiplied to do for us, and we are glad," and
again, "The Lord hath brought back upon us His good
gifts together with His gracious acts like the water
brooks that are in the South." And the holy [Mâr
Narses], like a vigilant watchman of the flock which
had been entrusted to him, kept a strict and careful
watch on all sides upon the sheep of his flock that
none of those believing men under his pastoral care
might stray in the slightest degree from what was
right. And he became like a wall to that flock, and
like a spiritual boatman he held the oars of that
spiritual ship, and guided it through the storms and
waves of [this] world, and brought it to the mansions
of heaven. And like a wise gardener he cleansed and
purified from it as from a garden all the bad shoots
and stubborn roots, and he drew water for the fruit-
bearing trees, and he made the sweet herbs to grow
up and to flourish, and he protected their fruit that
No example of this word seems to be recorded .ܚܣܝܡܘܬ݂ܳܐ -
in the Thesaurus of Payne Smith.
2 Psalm cxxvi. 3, 4.
3 Thomas seems to be quoting from memory, for the text
reads:-
ܕܐܤܓܝ ܡܪܝܐ ܠܡܥܒܕ ܥܡ ܗܠܨ܀
00:
ܐܗܦܟ ܡܪܝܐ ܫܒܝܬܢ ܐܝܟ ܦܨܝܕܐ ܕܒܬܝܡܢܐ܀
<pb n="539"/>
they might not be injured' by the wiles of Satan their
adversary, who is accustomed to put tares in the place
of choice wheat. And in order that when the account
of their reckoning and what they had lost should be de-
manded from them, he might in very truth give an
answer on their behalf, he diligently examined and
scrutinized and looked carefully into all the affairs of
those under his pastoral charge. And while he was
occupied and employed in working with such care as
this, and was meditating upon everything which belong-
ed to it by right, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="304"/> the Holy Spirit bestowed upon
him another gift of the power of healing, so that every
pain and sickness to which his blessing and holy right
hand drew near departed without delay from the body
in which it was. And he received the spirit of reve-
lation, and attained unto the knowledge of things which
were afar off, and as the Prophets and Apostles in
their times, the times when justice, and righteousness,
and chastity, and piety of life had fled from the
world, proclaimed peace upon all men and departed,
so the holy man triumphed, and in his days restored
the gift of miracles which had been taken away from
the world, and the name of Christ was magnified in
the mouth of the heathen, and honour was accorded
to the solitary and ascetic life through which his holi-
ness had flourished; and until the end of his life his
city remained unharmed by any injury either secret or
manifest.³
' at the beginning of line 15 should begin line 16.
Read N
3 I. e., he extirpated heresies which were the hidden diseases
of the minds of his people, and he healed their bodies of the
wounds which were open to the light of day.
<pb n="540"/>CHAPTER XV.
OF THE SPIRITUAL CONTEMPLATION AND OF THE INTELLECTUAL
PLEASURE IN THE THREE [KINDS OF] SPIRITUAL MEDITATIONS,
ON THE CORPOREAL, ON THE INCORPOREAL, AND ON THE
HOLY TRINITY, IN WHICH THE HOLY MAR NARSES WAS
TRAINED AND MEDITATED PHILOSOPHICALLY.
Certain of the fathers have written in their books
that there existeth in the heart a glorious intellectual
mirror which the Creator of natures formed from all
the visible and spiritual natures which are in creation
for the great honour of His image, and as a means
for discovering His invisibility; and He made it a tie,
and a bond, and a completion of all natures. Now
the fathers call it the "beauty of our person," and by
Saint Paul it is called the "house of love," and by the
doctors the "house of peace," and by the wise the
"house of goodness," and by others the "house of
joy," <pb type="textAllignment"  n="305"/> in which dwelleth the spirit of adoption
which we have received from holy baptism, and upon
it shineth the light of grace. And whosoever hath
cleansed this mirror of beautiful things from the im-
purity of the passions and from sin, and hath renewed
it and established it in the original condition of the
nature of its creation, can see by the light of its glorious
rays all spiritual things which belong to natures and
to things of creation which are afar off and which are
And he is able by the secret power of the Holy
Spirit to look into them closely as if they were all
arranged in order, without any covering whatever,
before his eyes. And when the working of God dawn-
eth upon the souls of holy men there dwelleth and
near.
<pb n="541"/>
abideth' upon it this gift of the Holy Spirit, and He
bestoweth this gift upon the good, and maketh them
to possess life and happiness for ever. And even thus,
according to what I have heard from those who saw
his glorious deeds, was the holy man of whom we are
about to speak worthy [of this gift].
Now there was in the Monastery of the holy Abba
Simon of Shennå," an old man whose name was Mârî,
and this man related to me concerning' the holy man,
that inasmuch as the blessed man was endowed with
the knowledge [of God], and his mind was continually
carried away towards God, he was unable to keep him-
self from this holy contemplation; and as in [the case
of] many [other] things he was prevented from going
down to the service of the Holy Mysteries on the
first days of the weeks, it was thought by the believers
that he acted thus by reason of the weight of his
old age. And it came to pass on a certain first day
of the week, when he was forced by the elect of
God, Rabban Shubhḥâl-Maran, the head of our mon-
astery, to be with him in the pulpit for the performing
of the service of the church, that Mâr Shubhḥal-Mâran saw
that he was occupied in meditating upon this subject
and in doing so he saw that he became unconscious
of every human feeling and movement, so much so that
he was utterly unmindful of the necessary acts which
.ܘܡܓܢܝܐ Read -
This sentence is quoted in B. O., iii. 1. p. 225, col. 2.
According to 'Abhd-Îsho' Simon composed certain Metrical
Homilies and Funeral Orations (B. O., iii. I. p. 226); he died
before A. D. 790.
.ܡܛܠܬܗ but read ܡܛܠܠܬܗ The ISS. hae 3
<pb n="542"/>the service of psalmody required, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="306"/> to sit down'
for the ķeryânê, and to lead off in the exordia,³
and he saw that his eyes were closed and that he
did not know where he was. And as soon as Rabban
Shubhḥal-Maran had gone up with him to his cell, he
fell at his feet and took an oath, saying, "I will not
stand up again until thou shalt have revealed unto me
concerning the vision which was seen by thee in the
church." And the holy Mâr Narses having required
the head of the monastery to keep this matter secret
until his death, answered and said to him, "Every
time I am in the church during the service of the
Mysteries, my mind is lifted up above the sight of
these things which are done during the service, and
above the church and its congregation, to the things
* "Before the reading of the Ķeryânâ the deacon exclaims
aloud: 'Sit down, and be silent;' and when it is ended, the
people rise at the bidding of the same minister, who then gives
notice of the short psalm which is to follow, and which is then
taken up and sung by the officiating priest. This psalm is
called Shûrâyâ, and generally consists of two verses taken from
the Psalter to which the Gloria Patri is added. The Shûràyà,
therefore, appears to hold the same place in the Nestorian
liturgy, as the tractus does in the Roman, the прокεíμеvov in
the Constantinopolitan, and the psalmellus in the Milan liturgies."
Badger, Nestorians, vol. ii. p. 20.
¹ The ķeryânê, i. e., "Readings", consist of extracts from
the Old Testament and the Acts of the Apostles: The first
ķeryânâ is always from the Old Testament, and in a few cases
the second Lesson also; but this latter is more generally taken
from the Acts of the Apostles. See Badger, Nestorians, völ. ii.
P. 19.
3 See Wright, Catalogue of Syriac MSS in the British
Museum, p. 131, col. 2, No. 4.
<pb n="543"/>
which are in heaven; and these things which are be-
fore my eyes are explained [mystically] by the things
which are secret and hidden from every man. The
church which is depicted before me [represents] that of
Jerusalem which is upon earth; the platform (Bµα) which
is in it [represents] Zion; the altar which is in it re-
presents the ark of the Old Covenant; the cross which
is upon it, and the Book of the Gospels [represent]
the New Covenant and the throne' of Christ at the
time of His dispensation here, and the connexion³ which
both Covenants possess, each with the other; the body
of priests which are in it [represents] the companies
of the Apostles; and the path* [leading] from the plat-
form to the cupola³ above the platform the narrow
path which goeth up to heaven.' The three steps which
are before the platform [symbolise] the third heaven
whither the blessed Paul was taken up;' the ķestromâ
the place [which extends] from this [earth] to the fir-
mament; the screen which is over the door of the
chancel, and the veils which are upon it indicate to
me a type of the firmament. The chancel [symbolises]
* Compare the mystic comparison of parts of the temple
quoted in full in B. O., iii. 1. p. 534, col 2.
id: wax bind sinop 29% so sp
2332
.ܟܘܪܣܝܗ ܕܡܝܚܐ܆ ܠܒܝܡ ܐܘܪܫܠܡ. ܘܫܪ.
.ܘܠܟܘܪܤܝܐ Read -
.ܘܠܣܝܦܘܬܐ Read 3
* The
x seems to have been a narrow staircase leading
from the ground up to the cupola where there may have been
a gallery.
.xorn - منتج 5
6 St. Matthew vii. 14.
7 2 Corinthians xii. 2.
° The As, i. c., "screen"
8
Αυτής και φράκτη.
or "lattice," which formed the
middle opening part of the wall of partition, separated the
<pb n="544"/>the place which is above the heavens;³ <pb type="textAllignment"  n="307"/> the
naos [symbolizes] the heaven of heavens and the Di-
vine Shechinah; and the veils which are upon it [in-
dicate] that the Godhead is hidden even from the angels.
The altar [represents] the throne of the Deity; the
priests [represent] the angels, the three congregations
of which are in heaven divided into nine companies.
The Cherubim, Seraphim and Thrones [which form]
seems to have ܩܤܛܪܘܡܐ The
chancel from the nave. It stood either upon the third or
highest step leading to the pain, or by the side of the lowest
step on the floor of the nave.
been the partition wall to the right and left of the door of the
, and its width must have been equal to the depth of the
three steps. According to this theory then would very
.ܬܘܠܬܐ ܕܫܡܝܐ well represent the
.ܪܩܝܥܐ We should expect 1
2 Here as seems toкiẞwpiov (see Du Cange, Glossarium,
col. 653), called also the coffer or chest in which the
eucharistic elements were placed; it also was veiled. See Payne
Smith, Thes., col. 3240. The as must have been a central
part of the nave.
3 See the Targûm of Onkelos on Exodus xxix. 45, 46;
and Buxtorf [ed. Fischer], s. v.
* Compare Tеτράßηlov, Du Cange, Glossarium, col. 186.
S
ܫܡܐ ܗܟܝܠ ܕܥܕܬܐ ܟܢܘܫܝܐ ܥܡ ܥܐܕܐ ܡܫܘܕܥ ܘܛܘܟܣܐ ܕܗܠܝܢ Compare
ܕܠܥܠ ܨܝܪܐ. ܐܝܟܙܢܐ ܓܝܪ ܕܬܓܡܐ ܬܫܥܐ ܗܢܘܢ ܕܠܪܒܘܬܐ ܡܫܡܝܢ܆ ܠܬܠܬܐ ܛܟܣܝܢ
ܡܦܠܓܝܢܢ܆ ܗܟܢܐ ܐܦ ܗܝ ܦܛܪܝܪܟ ܘܡܝܛܪ̈ܦܘܠܝܛܐ ܘܐܦܝܣܩܘܦܐܛܟܣܐ ܕܟܪ̈ܘܒܐ
ܘܕܣܪ̈ܦܐ ܘܡܘܬܒܐ ܡܡܠܝܢ. ܘܐܪ̈ܟܝܕܝܩܘܢܐ ܘܦܪ̈ܘܕܩܛܐ ܘܩܫܝܬܐ ܒܛܟܣܐ ܕܚܝܠܐ ܘܫܘܠܛܢ̈ܐ
ܘܡܪ̈ܘܬܐ ܩܝܡܝܢ. ܘܡܫܡܫܢܐ ܘܗܘܢܶܬܝܩܢܐ ܘܩܪܘܝܐ ܒܛܟܣܐ ܕܐܪ̈ܟܘܣ ܘܪ̈ܒܝܡܠܐܟܐ
25 Asso. See B. O., iii. 1. p. 355, col. 2, cap. VIII. For
a long discussion on the nine orders of angels by Solomon of
al-Başra see Budge, Book of the Bee, pp. 9-11. "The Cheru-
bim are an intellectual motion which bears the throne of the
Holy Trinity, and at their head stands Gabriel; the Seraphim
<pb n="545"/>
the first congregation represent to me Patriarchs, Metro-
politans and Bishops; the second congregation [which
consists] of Powers, Lords and Rulers [represents] priests,
and deacons, and solitaries; and the third congregation
[which consists] of Principalities, Archangels and Angels
[represents] sub-deacons, readers, and believing laymen.
The lights which are in the chancel fill the place of
Divine splendour, and the knowledge Divine in all
things by which all the companies of spiritual beings
sparkle and shine. The censer which hath been trans-
mitted by the priests, from hand to hand, in order,
from the priests of the early [period] to those of the
middle [period], and from the priests of the middle
period to those of these last times, [represents] the
doctrine of the things which are about to come to
pass, and of the things which must needs be, and which
the Divine dispensation demandeth, and which the angels
receive by teaching from one another. And the know-
ledge of things which are about to come to pass, and
the insight into things which are hidden, and the
are a fiery motion; and the Thrones are a fixed motion. The
Lords are a motion which is entrusted with the government of
the motions beneath it; the Powers are the minister of the will
of God; and Rulers are a motion which hath power over spiri-
tual treasures. This class of angels governs the luminaries, the
sun, moon and stars. The Principalities are a defined motion
which possesseth the direction of the upper ether, of rain, cloud,
lightning, thunder, whirlwinds, tempests, winds, etc.; the Arch-
angels are a swift operative motion which governeth the animal
creation and everything that hath life, from the gnat to the
elephant; and the Angels are a motion which hath spiritual
knowledge of everything that is on earth and in heaven. The
number of each one of these classes of angels is equal to the
number of all mankind from Adam to the resurrection."
zzz
<pb n="546"/>gratification and joy which we receive therefrom are
like unto the sweet scents which the censer breatheth
forth in our holy temples. The gathering of us all in
the church [symbolises] the universal assembling which
[shall take place] before the face of our Lord in the
celestial heights. Our choirs which face each other,
and the service which is sung by two choirs,' represent
those which cry each to each, and say, "Holy, Holy,
Holy, is the Lord the mighty One,"³ etc. So then by
reason of the contemplation of these things which are
before my sight, ³ ○ chosen one of Christ, I am
exalted to the incorporeal congregations of the spiritual
beings, and I forget myself, and I pass over by the
mental. faculty which I abstract from these typical
objects to the prototype' which is depicted upon my
understanding by these things which are above the
world. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="308"/> And on account of this many, many
times I have kept myself back from going into the
holy temple on days of assembling for holy feasts, and
since I am occupied in this enjoyment every first day
* I. e., "antiphonally". See Payne Smith, Thes., col. 673,
S. V., ; and 'AvriQuva and xopós in Du Cange, Glossarium,
coll. 89, 1756. On the two choirs in modern Nestorian churches
see Badger, Nestorians, vol. ii. p. 23.
2 "And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy,
is the Lord of hosts; the whole earth is full of his glory."
Isaiah vi. 3.
3 Read
.
4. An example of this word seems to be wanting
in Payne Smith, Thes.
5
See Payne Smith. Thes., col. 1448.
6. e., "exact image". See Payne Smith, Thes.
col. 3113.
e
id
ay
1
73
hes
ting
"kes.
<pb n="547"/>
of the week, in order that I may not be accounted a
drunkard and remote from knowledge and understanding
of those things which are being performed during the
festivals, I remain in my cell that I may not appear to
be such to the simple and pure minds of the saints.
For our Lord when pronouncing the Beatitudes spake,
saying, Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see
the living God;" and again, "I and my Father will
come, and we will make a dwelling with them";" and
again, "I will dwell in you and walk in you, and they
shall be one with us, even as Thou and I, O my Father,
are one". 3
And moreover this same very aged man Mârî who
related to me the things [above] concerning [Mâr
Narses], also told me saying:-"Once Abbâ Shubhḥál-
Måran asked him concerning the questions and answers
of the old men which are written in the Book of Para-
dise, saying, 'How is it, master, that the excellent Pal-
ladius was able to carry in his memory an innumerable
multitude of questions and to set them down in writ-
ing? Have they not been altered since the time when
they were spoken by the fathers and by those who
asked them?' And the holy Mâr Narses answered him,
saying, 'The histories of the holy fathers which
have written above them [the statement] that they
were composed by him, were actually written by him,
but the questions and their answers he gathered to-
gether from the collections of the books of the Fathers.
Now on the holy days of the Passover, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="309"/> and the
Passion, and the Resurrection, when they were going forth
St. Matthew v. 8.
3 St. John xvii. 21.
* St. John xiv. 23.
See Bk. ii. chap. 15, supra, p. 192.
<pb n="548"/>from the restraint of fasting, between one service and
the other, the holy fathers were accustomed to sit
down with the novices before them, and scribes wrote
down the questions which were asked and the expla-
nations of them, and counsels, and answers, and they
placed them in writing for their own benefit, and for
the benefit of those who should come after them; and
Divine grace worked upon the holy Bishop Palladius,
and he gathered them together'. And this thought
hath at times greatly troubled me also, but it was shewn
to me secretly that these things were written down in
this manner; and it is well known to us that the reve-
lation and knowledge of this [matter] became known
unto him by the hand of the holy angel which clave
unto him."
CHAPTER XVI.
OF THOSE THINGS WHICH WERE WROUGHT by THE HOLY
MAR NARSES, SOME BY SPIRITUAL VISION, AND SOME BY
THE WORKING OF MIRACLES, AND OF THE END OF
HIS LIFE.
If any man desireth to learn concerning all the
wonderful acts and mighty deeds of healing which the
holy man ever wrought, let him go to that believing
city [of Shennâ,] and he will hear about all the glorious
and excellent things which were performed by the
hands of that holy person, not only from priests and
deacons, and ordinary believing men, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="310"/> but also
from a host of women aud children, for behold, to this
day his wonderful acts are spoken of daily. I, however,
<pb n="549"/>
will write down a few pleasant memorials [of him] out
of the many things which I have heard concerning
him, even as I have done in the case of the histories
of the holy men his companions, leaving out the re-
mainder which are beyond counting, for I must bring
the writing of my history to a close. Now the vener-
able Eustathius told me that there were certain be-
lieving people in the royal city of Bagdad who had
an only son about twenty years old, who when he
was three years of age had fallen sick of the palsy, and he
was grievously afflicted by severe pains for seven years
until he became abhorred by his parents by reason of
this disease. And they would even have preferred
his death [to his being alive]; for he received no bene-
fit at all from the physicians, and he found no relief
from the prayers and gifts which his parents distribut-
ed on his behalf among the needy. Now the blessed
Mâr Narses had a man sick of the palsy in the house
of a certain rich God-fearing believer in Bagdad, and
one year the holy man went down to see the Cathol-
icus Mâr Timothy. And when those people learned
and heard from many concerning the gift of healing
which the blessed man possessed, they went to Mâr
Catholicus and entreated him to write to the holy man
Mâr Narses to command that the boy should be brought
to him, so that he might pray over him, that perad-
venture by [his] help he might receive healing. And
3, the common people as opposed to the nobility.
,Land( ܘܡܢ ܗܪܟܐ ܡܟܝܠ ܩܘܛܢܐ ܥܡ ܒܫܢܬܐ܆ ܒܡܚܘܬܐ ܚܕܐ ܪܒܬܐ ܘܫܪ.Compare
Anecdota, tom. ii. p. 315, 1. 5); Brit. Mus. MS. Oriental
2441, fol. 3276, col. I, where is explained by s and
and Payne Smith, Thes., col. 3580.
<pb n="550"/>he wrote through them [to him], saying, “Inasmuch as
thy holiness hath received the gift from the Holy
Spirit, which hath prepared for itself the working of
mighty deeds, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="311"/> and cures of sicknesses accord-
ing to thy piety through the virtues of the spirit and
of the body which it hath gathered together and placed
[in thee], and inasmuch as our Lord hath trusted thee
to be steward of His household, and to work wonder-
ful deeds, and hath set me in the third' grade of teach-
ing, as the blessed Paul glorieth, and inasmuch as these
believing people have required of me to write to thy
holiness to command them to bring to thee their sick
son who is struggling with disease, I entreat thee to
do this, and to let the young man be brought to thee,
and to let him be blessed by thy holy right hand; and
our Lord Christ shall heal him also of the infirmity
which hath become confirmed in him, even as He hath
healed others by thy hands". And when the blessed
Iman had read the letter, he commanded them to bring
the young man to him. And Eustathius swore that
they took the young man, who was lying in his bed*
upon his back and was unable to turn upon either side,
to the upper chamber of the blessed man, and Mâr
Narses commanded them, saying, "Go to your house,
and at mid-day come and take away your son." And
when they had come back according to his command
and the masters of the house had informed him, he
commanded the young man, who had been made whole
and sound by the might of the prayer of the blessed
* "First apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly teachers, then
miracles". I Corinthians xii. 28.
2-AEKTÍкIOV; see Du Cange, Glossarium, col. 801.
<pb n="551"/>
man, and he went down the steps of the staircase of
the gallery with leaps, like the paralytic whom the
Apostles healed in Jerusalem;' and he induced and
moved all men to give praise to God, the Lord of all,
Who had visited our evil generation in the person of
this holy man; and this thing was known throughout
all the city.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="312"/> And again there lived in the city of Shennâ
a well-known believer, who had an only son, who when
he was eight years of age departed from this world
through the destructive work of magic. And when
the blessed man heard the sound of the funeral service
with which the boy was being carried to the cemetery,
and the noise of the crowd, and the weeping of his
parents as they arrived at the door of the church, he
stood at the door holding the stick upon which his
old age was supported, and commanded them, saying,
"Enter in all of you, and [bring] the dead body with
you, that we may perform a short service over it in
the church"; and the people did so, and the bier was
set down in the place where the services were held.”
3
1 Acts iii. 1-10.
.ܟܘܪܘܣ to-day give the name of
literally, "the place of the liturgy." It seems
to have been that part of the church which was just in front
of the which was called by the Greeks σwhéa (see Du
Cange, Glossarium, col. 1513), and to which the Nestorians
The bodies of laymen are
not carried into the church as a general rule; see Badger,
Nestorians, vol. ii. p. 297. The leader of the singing was
called i. e., кavováрxos (Du Cange, Glossarium, col.
583). Some interesting remarks on the singing of the Psalms
and their division into kathismata, and the hours for prayer
will be found in Usener, Der heilige Theodosios, p. 45, 1. 19
<pb n="552">
And the blessed man commanded every one to bow
down in worship and to kneel, and he commanded the
parents of the boy to untie the cords and bandages
with which he was bound, and he took hold of his
hand, and said to him, "By the might of our God,
rise up", and the boy sat up alive. And the blessed
man answered and said, "The death of your son was
an act of magicians, but henceforth fear not, for he
shall not suffer this mischance a second time;" and
every one glorified God and returned to their houses.
THOMAS OF MARGA, THE BOOK OF GOVERNORS.
Now the blessed man had as a disciple, a certain
priest whose name was Cyprian, and this man told
[me], saying, "One night while I was sleeping in the
outer courtyard [of the house] of the holy man, and
he was inside, he came out to me hastily, and stirred
and roused me up, and he answered and said to me
sadly, 'Rise up, my son, and take with thee a little
bread and a jar of water, and a rope, and take with
thee a donkey, and go quickly to the ruined village
of Ḥammîmâ, and go into a ruined house which is in
such and such a place, and behold there is there a
dry well into which a man has fallen, and thieves threw
him into it two days ago; draw him up and lift him
out, and feed him with bread and water, and set him
upon the animal and bring him hither'. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="313"/> And I
answered and said to him, 'Be patient a little, master,
and with the dawn I will set out, for I am afraid lest
some harm should happen to me on the road during
the night time.' And the holy man answered and said
to me, 'My son, go quickly before that stranger die, and
(and note on p. 150); p. 154, and p. 49, 1. 5 (and note on
p. 153).
<pb n="553"/>
I will be a pledge to thee that neither evil hap nor
injury shall befall thee.' "And", said Cyprian, "through
[my] confidence in the word of the blessed man I did
what he commanded me, and I went to the ruined
village according to the indications which he had given
me. And I stood above the well, and I cried out, and
there answered me [a man] who chattered like a bird,
and I drew him up, and lifted him out, and I brought
him to the city to Mår Narses. And he remained
with him until he was healed of the bruises and wounds
in his limbs, and with a blessing he bestowed upon
him a prayer for the way, and sent him away from
his house."
"And again, one day at dawn he called me, and
said to me, 'Go to-day to the banks of the Tigris and
command the sailors that not one of them unmoor his
boat to cross over to the other side, that their ships
be not broken and sunk, for a violent storm is about
to arise through a mighty wind'-now this wind
actually arrived-; 'and the boat and all the cargo of
every man who doth not receive what I have said
shall perish', now it was the season of the great flood
when the rivers Tigris and the Little Zâb overflow."
* The overflow of the Tigris and Zâb rivers is caused by
the melting of the snow in the mountains where they rise. The
first spring flood takes place about the middle of February and
in a few days the river rises several feet and floods all the low-
lying country on each side of its banks. In February 1889,
I while I was at Môșul carrying on excavations at Kouyunjik
for the Trustees of the British Museum, the water reached nearly
to the mound of Kouyunjik, and about two months later it
actually touched its base which is several feet above the nor-
mal height of the river. The little river Hôser (in Assyrian
aaaa
<pb n="554"/>"And again, on another occasion, there began to
be a pestilence in the city of Mår Narses, and the
believers entreated him to allow them to decree a
solemn supplication to God on account of this. And
he said to them, 'That we should make a solemn sup-
plication is a good thing to do, but death, which is
your master, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="314"/> will not be stayed unless he hath
taken from among your souls according to the number
which God hath decreed shall be taken from you as
a punishment.' Now he privily made known the number
to his disciple, and when this limit was reached the
sword of death rested and stayed."
1) became a mighty stream, and it was
not hard to understand how very materially this river which
Sennacherib tells us he brought to Nineveh (Rawlinson, Cunei-
form Inscriptions of Western Asia, vol. iii. pl. 14, l. 11),
Imust have helped to destroy the palaces of his great city. The
yellow Tigris flowed along with its swollen stream at the rate
of 5 or 6 miles an hour, and small rafts reached Bagdad in
4 days, including stoppages of a few hours each night. The
distance from Môșul to Bagdad viâ Kerkûk is about 300 miles,
and I believe the distance by river to be about 400. The
greatest flood of the Tigris and Zâb takes place in April. It
may be noticed that Thomas of Margå used the Syriac form
of the Old Assyrian word for "flood"; i. c., - Assyrian
mi-lum; see Strassmaier, Wörterverzeichniss, No. 5294, p. 658;
Bruno, A Classified List, Leyden 1887, p. 466, No. 11538;
Smith, Sennacherib, p. 146, l. 52; Rawlinson, Cuneiform In-
scriptions of Western Asia, vol. I. pl. 57, col. vii. 1. 51; and
Norris, Assyrian Dictionary, pt. iii. p. 789. Floods on the
Tigris are often accompanied by violent south-east winds which
literally blow craft up the river or into the banks, and it is
necessary to cut the bridges of boats until the wind and stream
subside.
<pb n="555"/>
"Now there was an exceedingly wicked Arab who
surpassed all those who lived in his time and after him
in his cruelty and plunderings, and his name was
Yale bar-Himrân of Beni-Taimlah,' which is in this
country of Adiabene. And this man having brought
himself to execute all wickedness, the [shedding of] blood
and the slaughter of men were regarded by him as
the slaughter of snakes and scorpions, and his con-
science never pricked him because of the blood of the
holy men which he cruelly shed. And this man des-
troyed the Monastery of the holy Rabban Mår Job,
and the Monastery of Bêth Nestorius and the Monastery
of Margânâ,³ and he left many places without an in-
habitant. He rode a mare without saddle or bridle,
and none of the governors was able to overtake him
because he could travel in one night twenty farsaḥ,
more or less, at a rapid rate, and while he was heard
of in this country to-day, to-morrow he was heard of
in a very distant one. Now this utterly wicked man
went down to the Monastery of the holy Abbâ Simon,
and he went up covertly to the cell of Rabban
Shubhḥâl-Maran, the head of the monastery, and slew
him. And it was revealed to the blessed Mår Narses,
and Cyprian his disciple said, 'When deep sleep falleth
(2)
For the name يُعلى بن حمران من بنى تيم الله :
.ܕܩܛܠܐ ܣܢ ܕܚܪܘܬܐ Hofmann suggests that we read 2
✓✓ see Ibn al-Athîr, tom. xiv. p. 663; and for
see Ibn al-Athir, vol. xiii. p. 197.
3 Hoffmann would point
The
English miles.
Arab.
Maparva?
Gr. mapaσárns - about three
5 The next three clauses are quoted in B. O., iii. 1. p. 225,
col. 2.
<pb n="556"/>I
upon man, with sadness and tears he cried to me,
saying, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="315"/> 'Rise up, my son, and follow me, and
let us go to the Monastery of Abba Simon;' and we
went forth from the church and arrived at the Tigris,
and he made the sign of the cross over the water
and he took hold of me with his hand, and said to me,
'Come with me, and fear not.' And we crossed over,
and went into the monastery, and he sent me to cry
out and to knock at the door of the common-room,
and the brethren came out, and I took them to him.
And he answered and said to them, with tears, 'Woe
to you my brethren, for your chief Shubhhâl-Mâran is
slain;' and we all went to his cell, and we found that
blessed old man smitten with knife and sword wounds.
And upon this a great uproar arose, and that murderer
from the top of a hill answered and said to us, 'I am
Ya'lê bar-Ḥimrân, and I have slain the head of the
monastery; after a time I will come and destroy you
all.' The holy Mår Narses said to him, 'If thou dost
ever return here I will dry up the mighty river Tigris.
The decree of the Highest hath gone forth against
thee, and thou wilt be slain by the governor of the
city of Ḥadhattà in the village of Estrenya.' And thus
our Lord actually did to that murderer, for wishing to
come back again to Shennâ, the governor of Ḥadhattâ
slew him in Esṭrenyà according to the word of the
holy man'."
"And also, one year when I for some reason or
other was coming up from the low countries with the
boatmen along the banks of the Tigris, there met me
* Compare Job iv. 13, and see Hoffmann, Syr. Arab. Glossen,
No. 2481, p. 88.
<pb n="557"/>
above the city of Ḥadhattâ a certain fisherman whose
name was Hêshim,' and who having tied up his large
net was wishing to cast his gâwpå' into the river.
And he lifted it up in his right hand, and spake
with his mouth, saying, 'In the name of the living God,
and by the prayer of the holy Mår Narses.' And I said
to him, 'How is it that being an Arab thou didst call
upon the holy Mâr Narses, a Christian teacher, to help
thee by his prayers?" <pb type="textAllignment"  n="316"/> He said to me, 'Upon
which Mar Narses thinkest thou that I called?' And
I said to him, 'As I think, Mâr Narses the teacher who
lived in Nisibis.' He said to me, That Mår Narses
upon whom I called was the blessed Mår Narses who
was Bishop of Shennå. For when I was a boy with
my father and we were fishing there, we used to see
him continually crossing over upon the water at night-
time from his city to the Monastery of Rabban Simon,
and back again from the monastery to the city. And
when he perceived that we had seen him, he sent his
disciple after us early one day, and called my father
to him, and he prayed and entreated of him that he
would reveal [this] to no man until [after] the holy man's
death. And he blessed us, and said to us, 'Every time
Read
* The
(le)?
was a long, narrow net with spikes of palm
branches fixed in it from one end to the other.
3 The custom of casting the net in the name of a stranger
passing when fishermen are fishing is to this day common along
the Tigris.
4 For Narses, "the harp of the Spirit," and his work in the
school of Nisibis see B. O., iii. 1. p. 63ff.
5 The next seven clauses are quoted in B. O., iii. I. p. 226,
col. I.
<pb n="558"/>ye fish, and ye make mention of the living name of God,
the Lord of all, and the name of my sinfulness, an
abundant catch of fish shall be brought back to you
in a full net;' and from that time to this, whenever we
have made mention of that holy man, we have made
a large haul of fish in the Tigris.'"*
"And again, there was a certain Arab' who had
never taken anything from any man by fraud or injury,
and he was in want, and he went out one night to go
and plunder and steal. And after the death of the
blessed man he said, 'I went out to steal, being in
want, and I crossed over the Zâb and went to the
neighbourhood of Ekrôntâ,³ I and two members of my
household, and we took from there many sheep, and a
quantity of other things, and we left the guardians who
were there strongly bound and beaten. And when we
were in the plain opposite Shennâ, behold the blessed
man himself was coming towards us, and he met us
above the Monastery which is named after Bar-Gamêsh.*
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="317"/> And when the mare which I was riding saw
him now it was a dark night without a moon-she
pricked up her ears, and threw up her neck, and I
knew that something had appeared to her; and I laid
the pointed end of the spear on [her head] between
* Literally, "with an overflowing hand have we taken prey
from the Tigris.
On the form of this word see Hoffmann, Opus-
cula Nestoriana, p. 95. 6.
العقير ",little Akra , صفحة 3
* Assemânî gives
(B. O., iii. I. p. 495,
col. 1. 1. 2), but all the MSS. known to me read
<pb n="559"/>
her ears, and let go of the bridle, and she charged
straight ahead against the blessed man who was
coming on towards us without fear. And when I saw
him I lifted up the spear and wished to drive it into
him, and he answered in the Syriac tongue, and smiling
said to me, 'O thou that hast a spear and a mare,
smite me not.' And I answered and said to him,
Who art thou?' And he said to me, 'I am Narses the
Bishop.' And I got down from the mare and fell at
´his feet, for I was acquainted with the beauty of his
holiness. And I said to him again, ‘How hast thou
come hither at this time [of night]? and who ferried
thee across the river? and for what cause hast thou
troubled thyself [to come out] at this time [of night]?"
He said to me,. 'I have come out for thy deliverance,
and the Lord Who desireth not that thou shouldst
live before Him a life of theft and fraud hath sent me;
now take back everything which thou hast with thee,
and go and set free those men from their bonds, and
hand over to them everything which thou hast taken,
and come to me to my cell to-morrow privily, and
I will give to thee more than that which thou hast
taken by wickedness.' And when I saw that the man
possessed so great renown that God had informed him
concerning the iniquity which had taken place by my
hands, and that God had not allowed me to be pol-
luted by sins which I had never committed in the days
of my youth, I promised him that I would readily do
it, and I did according to his will. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="318"/> Next
morning I went to him without delay, and he brought
out five hundred zûzê and gave to me, and he said
.ܐܫܬܘܕܝܬ Read -
.ܘܠܡܚܪܬܐ ܠܩܬܝ Read -
<pb n="560"/>to me, 'Buy thyself two yoke of asses, and buy wheat
and sow a field, and behold thou shalt gather in a
crop a hundredfold, and our Lord will make thee rich,
and thou wilt not need to perform this disgraceful work;
and it came to pass according to his word, and I
gathered fruit a hundredfold, and by his blessing from
being a poor man I became rich.""
Now if I were to write down all his acts, how
many sick he healed, how many evil devils he drove
out from men, and what temptations and trials he endur-
ed from bad and vicious men, as well as all his glorious
deeds, I think that much time would not be sufficient
for this, and that many volumes would not contain
the multitude of mighty deeds and wonders which
Christ wrought by his hands; and from the time when
we began to write our history until now, it hath not
been our intention [to do this], but only to give a brief.
account of each one of the holy fathers. So [Mar
Narses] finished the rest of his days, and rested in
peace with all the just and upright men, and his holy
body was laid in the holy church of that city, where
the holy fathers [who were] Bishops before him lie;
and his holy body in that holy church in which he
performed the duties of priest, became a haven of help
and a fountain of healing for all those who were at-
tacked by any kind of pain and temptation, whether
of bodily sickness, or affliction by cruel devils. May
our Lord also shew compassion upon us by his prayers,
that the remainder of our days may be made perfect
according to His good will and pleasure, and may we
Literally, "many rolls of paper." 230-2000.
<pb n="561"/>
make praise to ascend to the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Spirit, now and always, and for ever
and ever, Amen.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="319"/>
CHAPTER XVII.
THE HISTORY OF THE HOLY ABBA JOSEPH.
The greater number of the histories which I have
written before this I have written down in order from
hearsay and from tradition handed down from one
[man] to the other; but the present history, which is
now in my hands and which my discourse wisheth to
set forth clearly, concerneth the holy and blessed life
of Rabban Joseph, of whom I was a contemporary.
And moreover I have been blessed by that God-worthy
old man, for he departed from affairs of this mortal
life to the everlasting house of light in the first year
of my coming to this holy monastery [of Bêth 'Abhê].
Now this blessed man came from the country of Beth
Garmai, from the district called Bêth Měshainânê, which
is situated on the Lower Zâb, and from his youth up
he was a disciple in this your monastery of Beth Abhê.
And from the beginning of his coming out from the
world he expelled from his heart all noxious thoughts
and emotions, and he renounced every material thing
absolutely, and he built himself a cell in that valley
which is called Dakhya; and he dwelt therein all the
days of his life with absolute poverty of the spirit, and
he did not possess, according to what is said [about
him, the quality] which may be called friendly affection.
.ܠܒܬ ܥܠܡ but read ,ܠܒܝܬ ܢܳܠܡ The MSS. have -
2 According to Bk. ii. chap. 40, Thomas of Margâ came to
Bêth 'Abhê A. H. 217-A. D. 832.
bbbb
<pb n="562"/>During the whole period of his life he had neither
companion nor disciple, and he either collected wheat
from a little plot of cultivated ground which he had
before his cell, or he went out to harvest with his
fellow [monks], and from this he supplied his want in
a very sparing manner. And in addition to all his
excellent virtues, I observed also in that holy person,
of whose prayers I am in need, the following method
which he observed for guarding his feelings: namely,
that he always looked straight before him, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="320"/> and
that even when he was in his cell he never moved his
neck to this side or to that to look at any place, so that
the nerves of his neck and shoulders which went up his
head, according to the arrangement of our natural con-
struction, had become dried up, and he was only able
to see such things as were quite near him at his feet,
but other things which were a little way off, either
to this side or to that, he could not see at all. The
very old solitaries whom I found told [me] concerning
him: "For forty years he has neither lifted up [his head],
nor seen the ceiling of this temple," even as it is
written of a monk like unto himself, "His eyes were
destroyed, and his eyelids³ were worn away, and the
* According to Palladius Abba Hôr of the "Cells" dwelt for
twenty years in the church, and during this time he never lifted
up his eyes or saw the ceiling.
2 See Bk. i. chap. 38, supra, p. 261, (text p. 122. 16).
3 According to Brit. Mus. MS. Rich 7203, fol. 202a, col. 2,
هرست مقدم eyelids. Compare also جُنون and الأَجْفَان ـ حبة
Las Noobs
Las?
Land, Anecdota, tom. ii. p. 24, 1. 19; and Neo-Syriac tilpâpê,
Socin, Die Neu-Aram. Dialekte von Urmia bis Mosul, Tübingen,
1882, p. 138, col. I, 1. 21.
<pb n="563"/>
flesh beneath them was seared and blackened by reason
of the perpetual flow of his tears;" and he ended his
life peacefully, wishing to be known to no man, nor to
be considered by any.
At that time when I was his contemporary the
thievish Kartĕwayê* came against us in great numbers,
and they spoiled and seized all the monastery, and they
went into all the cells, and took everything which they
found; now since we all had taken refuge in flight to
every hill, there was the greater opportunity for them
to go about³ quietly through all the common-rooms of
the monastery and the cells, for it was daytime. And
when they had set out and departed from the mon-
astery, we all went back, and one of the brethren [who
were] the neighbours of Abba Joseph went to see what
had happened to that holy old man, and he found him
sleeping the mid-day sleep in the little doorway' of
* Thomas of Margâ here refers to Arsenius, of whom the
following description is given by Palladius:- 200 000 máso
2007 No pop sad sad on 2007 sup
2007 2007 sportos no passados.
Norms 3 Up 2007 she sat brow and
2007 No ASA for banovo from 2009 wy
2002 2007 App
NP 2007
pup 2007 quis how No 2007 b.xl
(fol. 2166). . 2009 o raza's No
* See supra, p. 224, note 1.
3 For the root A✓ see Bickell, Carmina Nisibena, p. 63,
col. 1; Payne Smith, Thes., col. 3571.
fem. of Chald. S or NO. The Syriac
word seems to be derived from the Babylonian and Assyrian
a-bul-lum "gate," which is the Semitic translation
of the Accadian KA-GAL; see Bruno, A Classified List, p. 172,
<pb n="564"/>his habitation with the door open upon the old man
for coolness. And he asked him, saying, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="321"/> "Father,
whither didst thou flee from before the Kartěwâyê who
came against us this day, and who have carried off all
our property?" And being astonished he answered and
said, "My son, I did not perceive that thieves had been
here;" thus did God guard that man from harm and
trouble by those thieves.
Now the pious Ḥakîmâ, Bishop of Ghâwkai'-now
one day I went to this blessed man to ask for his
prayers, and to be blessed by him-told me [saying],
"When I knocked [at his door] and he opened [it] to
me, I sat down with him for a little, and [as] he dis-
missed me to go forth he brought out and gave me
a small bowl, the like of which for manner of make
and appearance I had never seen. And he answered
and said to me, 'Give this, my son, to such and such
an old man, and take it for him as a gift of grace
and say to him, Thy gift of grace is accepted, for
since thou didst bring me cooked food in this bowl
for three days [at a time] nothing was lacking to me.'
For behold the Angel of the Lord had brought food
to him even as He sent food to Daniel by the hands
No. 3892; Strassmaier, Wörterverzeichniss, No. 59, p. 13, and
for the form a-bu-la see The Tell el-Amarna tablets
in the British Museum, p. 87, No. 42, 1. 39. For the
Greek Euẞolog see Du Cange, Glossarium, col. 378, and for
native explanations of a see Payne Smith, Thes., col. II;
Duval, Lexicon, col. 12; and Hoffmann, Syr.-Arab. Glossen,
No. 30, p. 6.
was
a
town
of
Beth
Garmai which was situated near ܠܘܬ݂ܳ ܃
or on the Lower Zâb; see B.
O., iii. ii. p. 749.
2 The MSS. have but read.
<pb n="565"/>
of Habakkuk, from Judah to Babylon.* And I am
certain that such was really the case, for when I had
taken the bowl to that old man, and had repeated to
him these things which Abba Joseph had said to me,
he swore to me and assured me with an oath, saying,
'It is more than a year since I went to the cell of that
blessed man.' Now the angel of the Lord in the form
of that old man, had appeared to Abba Joseph, who
bore hunger inside the door of his cell and who never
went outside to knock at any human door to supply
his need."
Now there was in this monastery a man whose
name was Palôhâ, and he was a hireling of the mon-
astery, and was sent by those who were over the af-
fairs of the monastery to cut wood [and to bring it]
in a boat. Now Rabban Joseph had the day before
gone to the holy Monastery of Rabban Mår Isho-Zěkhâ,
which is called Gâșṣâ,* <pb type="textAllignment"  n="322"/> and at the break of
day he turned to come back, and Pâlôḥâ saw the holy
man on the other side of the river, and he recognized
that it was he; and he saw that when he had drawn near
to the Zâb he made the sign of the cross and cross-
ed over upon the top of the water, and he drew near
to him and saluted him. And when the old man saw
and knew that Pâlóḥâ had perceived him care afflicted
him, and he was troubled, and he adjured him, saying,
"Thou art forbidden by the word of our Lord to make
I
ܘܗܘ ܐܝܬܝ ܫܪܘܬܐ ܠܕܚܐܝܠ ܠܒܩܠ ܒܡܥܒܕܢܘܬܐ ܡܠܐܟܝܬܐ Compare
Budge, Book of the Bee, p. 77; and see Delitzsch, Der Prophet
Habakuk ausgelegt, Leipzig, 1843; History of the Destruction
of Bel and the Dragon, 33-39; Epiphanius, De Prophetarum
Vitis, in Migne, Patrol. Cursus, Ser. Gr., t. 43, coll. 415-427.
See Bk. ii. chap. 17, supra, p. 210.
<pb n="566"/>known what thou hast seen until I depart [this] life;"
and he left him and came to his cell. And Pâlôḥâ,
paying no heed to the ban, neither fearing the oaths,
related this before the whole brotherhood.
Now when I lived in the service of the monastery
I used to pasture a few cattle which we had in the
monastery in the woods [which were] in the valley
near the cemetery, and I heard from within the thicket
the sound of bitter weeping, like that of one fastened
in the stocks." And at the noise of the mournful out-
cries I went softly into [the thicket] and found Abba
Joseph sitting on the ground among the grass and
plants and flowers-now it was the time of the month
of lyår-and saw him gathering dry grasses from
among the green grass, which he brought with
his hands before his face, and weeping bitterly he said,
"The days of man are like the grass, and he groweth
up like the herb of the field, which when the wind
hath blown over it is not, neither is its place known;"³
and again, "Man is like unto a vapour, and his days
pass like a shadow;" and he laid them down upon
the ground. And again he gathered other grasses and
after he had weeded out all the old, he passed his
hand softly over the new, and embracing them said,
"Verily the generations of flesh and blood are like
unto the leaves of trees, some of which fade and fall,
and some of which grow up;" and he repeated these
* Thomas of Margå is now speaking of himself.
";a large and thick fetter for the feet" ܣܘܛܡܐ ܪܡܐ ܘܥܒܐ ܝ ܪܐ -
see Hoffmann, Opuscula Nestoriana, 153. 16.
3 Psalm xc. 5, 6.
Psalm cxliv. 4.
5 Compare Isaiah lxiv. 6; Psalm xc; Isaiah xl. 6, 7.
<pb n="567"/>
[words] with mournful sighs and groans while tears
flowed down from his eyes abundantly. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="323"/> And
again he took some of the beautiful flowers, and look-
ing at them sweetly he groaned, and said to God,
"Glory be to Thee, O Creator of all [things], how
beautiful are Thy works." Now I standing silently
above him marvelled at the wonderful things that I
Isaw, and how that holy old man was able to weep over
such contemptible and despicable matters with so great
a weeping which others could not have wept even
had they been beaten. And after his great weeping
and his bitter outcries, he started up with gratitude
to God, and there sprang up gladness within him, and
like David, his mouth was filled with laughter, and his
tongue with praise," and he took some of those flowers
which were in front of him in his hand, and bringing
them near to his nose, he lifted up his voice and sang
in metre the whole of the hymn of Hosannas, "The
rose, and the lilies, and the blossoms, and the spring
flowers are very lovely in their appearance;" and without
being perceived, for he would have been angry,
I left
him and went away. There are many things about
him [which I could tell], but I pass over them all that
I may not burden this discourse with too much weight,
and that it may not become longer than its fellows.
Now when this holy man died he was alone in his cell,
and he departed this life without a servant, for no man
ministered unto him during his illness; but the holy
Rabban Peter his fellow-soldier knew of it, but whether
by divine revelation, or whether because he went to
* Compare Psalm cxi. 3; cxlv. 5.
2 Psalm cxxvi. 2.
<pb n="568"/>visit him is hidden from us, and he made known to us
concerning his death. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="324"/> And the funeral service
was said over his venerable body and it was laid in
the common sepulchre of the monastery near the orat-
ory; may we receive a blessing through it, and may
we be helped by his prayers, Amen.
Here endeth the history of the holy men who lived
in the Monastery of Bêth 'Abhê.
Permit me to inform thy love, O Mâr Abd-isho, and
every one who shall peruse these lines that I am not to
be blamed because I have not been able to write these
histories with polished speech and with learned words
skilfully strung together. For I have not done it as
well as I could have wished, but according to my power
and as I was able, and that which [is done] according
to [a man's] power is beloved by God and [resteth] upon
Him. To God the Cause of all things, the Supporter of all
things, and the Administrator of all things, be glory, and
honour, and praise, and worship, and thanksgiving, now
and always, and for ever and ever, Amen.
Here end the five Books of the triumphs of the holy
Fathers.
ܡܟܠܐ Read -
<pb n="569"/>
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="325"/>
BOOK VI.
[CHAPTER I.]
THE HISTORIES OF RABBAN CYPRIAN AND OF RABBAN GABRIEL
THE HOLY HEAD OF THE MONASTERY WHICH IS IN THE
DISTRICT OF BIRTÂ, IN THE COUNTRY OF MARGA,
COMPOSED BY THE PIOUS THOMAS.
According to what the holy fathers say, the rational
soul possesseth three powers, desire, anger, and thought,
and from these, as from fathers and mothers, are pro-
duced the other powers. From desire spring chastity,
love, and patience; from anger, strength and fortitude,
and from thought understanding, wisdom and know-
ledge. From these, according to what say the holy
writers on the ascetic and monastic life, is propagated
in the God-loving heart every work upon which as
by stories, the spiritual building riseth and with
which the mind, which is wise in Divine matters,
buildeth up and completeth the whole tower which
mounteth up to heaven. Now the labours and habits
of life which are wrought by holy men and which have
repentance as their aim, namely, fasting, watching, bow-
ing of the whole body and head to the ground, and'
The MSS. have but read go.
СССС
<pb n="570"/>prayers themselves, are the primary matters and mate-
rials for the ascetic life; and services of Psalms, self-
denial, tears, contrition, readings of the Scriptures,
patience, seriousness, chastity, voluntary poverty, silence,
meditation on divine matters, the despising of self,
the fleeing away from men, the struggling, and the
sitting apart quietly in the cell: <pb type="textAllignment"  n="326"/> these are all
the various things which purify the understanding
[which] loveth prudence. These, and more than these,
needeth the labour of monks which is performed with
correct aim and for the sake of the glory of the world
which is to come. And the blessed Mark the monk
grouped these things under the three comprehensive
heads of the ascetic life, namely, "that a man should
pray without ceasing; that he should cleanse his thoughts;
and that he should endure those things which happen."
Wherefore when the soul of him that would be per-
fect in these things hath entered into them, it hath
already become a dwelling-place for the Holy Spirit;
and hath trodden the passions under foot; and hath
become exalted above the body; and hath yoked it
beneath itself like a chariot; and like a strenuous
charioteer it pursueth after the passions and treadeth
under foot the desires of the body; and like a fire
blazing with the love of our Lord it burneth up all
humidity [of the body] which is placed as an obstacle
in the burning path of Christ; and it is filled with
love towards its neighbour, from which love for God
is produced, and concerning which the divine Apostle
John saith in his Catholic Epistle, "He that thinketh he
* The MSS. have, but read.
ܘܟܕܢܬܗ Read  ܶ
<pb n="571"/>
loveth God, but who loveth not his brother whom he
hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not
seen?": [Thus] thou seest that love to God is produced
by love to man. And [this] soul despiseth the hostile
disposition and all the crafty duplicity of the devils
which are its enemies, and by the Divine help in which
it taketh refuge it cutteth to pieces their snares, and
dissipateth their crafts and wiles, and becometh a man-
sion of Christ, and He, and His Father, and His Spirit
come and make their dwelling with it. And it attaineth
the heavenly rest and the Sabbath peace in that mystical
feast which the tried fathers who have penetrated
into the mysteries of the new world have celebrated
in the secrecy of their pure minds, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="327"/> by a bond of
perfect unity which is joined* to its object and which is
superior to this world, and which can never be ex-
plained by created beings with a tongue of flesh, and
which is filled³ on all sides with understanding which
is superior to the learning of books," and the mind
plungeth into the obscure and concealed domain of their
dark hiding place, and emergeth into the splendour of
their enjoyments and forgetteth the world and every-
thing which is in it. And it happeneth that twice and
thrice a day [the mind] is absorbed there without per-
ceiving it, even as it is said concerning every one of
the holy men, and according also to what happened to
Abbâ Sisoes, who when his disciple knocked at the
I I John iv. 20, 21.
.ܡܬܐܣܪܪ but read ,ܡܬܐܣܪܢܳܐ The MSS. have 2
.ܚܘܝܕܐ agreeing with ܡܬܡܠܐ Read 3
4 Literally, "the learning of ink."
5 See supra, p. 29.
<pb n="572"/>door of his cell to come in cried out, saying, “Be gone,
Abraham,' and come not in hither, for this place will
not suffice [for thee]";" and according to that which
[happened] to Abbi Bessarion, - and which was wrought
I
This Abraham is mentioned in Rosweyde, Vitae Patrum,
p. 570, No. 37; and p. 651, No. 14.
This sentence is given by Cotelerius, Eccles. Grace. Mon.,
tom. I. p. 672, No. xxvii.
3 The account of Bessarion by Palladius is as follows:-
ܕܠܐ ܫܓܝܫܘܬܐ ܘܒܝܠܘܬܐ ܢܦܩܗ ܠܟܠܗ ܙܒܢܐ ܕܚܝܘܗܝ. ܠܐ ܓܝܪ ܨܦܬܐ ܕܩܠܐ ܫܟܝܚܐ
ܕܤܝܐ ܟܕ ܒܙܒܢ ܒܝܢܬ ܫܟ̈ܝܦܐ ܘܒܚܘܪܒܐ ܡܬܞܦܟ. ܘܐܗܘ ܕܢܓܕܫ ܘܢܣܬܩܒܠ ܗܘܐ
<pb n="573"/>
for the blessed Macarius' and others. Observe then
to what [height] is exalted the dust of Adam, which
is formed with the clay of passions and moistened with
the water of wandering from what is right. So mayest
thou know that when man is purified from the passions
which are within [him] and without, and his course
moveth in a supernatural place, he will be able to illu-
mine all deep places, and to throw light into the
deepest wells; and thus the spiritual eye, which is the
understanding, shineth and illumineth others, like a
polished mirror which when placed opposite the sun,
also reflecteth in the same manner the glorious rays
which overcome the pupils of eyes of flesh. To such
degrees and to such great glory were lifted up the holy
men, who were superior to the world in their lives
and actions, and concerning whom our feeble narrative
wisheth to relate, that is to say, Rabban Cyprian the
232 200 12 42 spe Up 2007 2007
ܕܫܟܚ ܗܿܘ ܡܕܡ ܕܐܘܒܕܬ ܡܥܐ ܐܬܐ. ܐܠܐ ܬܘܣ ܝܬܝܪܐܝܬ ܐܝܟ ܕܚܙܐ ܐܢܐ ܡܢܝ ܡܬܦܬܐ.
No
Up Dax No rasad is: A sando po
*pp was 20x2 babpp is 22
(fol. 1316.) The abbot Bessarion lived in the fourth century
of our era. He is said to have been able to cross rivers by
walking upon the water; to have caused the sun to refrain
from setting until he had arrived at the cell of a certain sage;
to have healed the sick and to have cast out devils; and to
have been acquainted with the decrees of God before they were
worked out. For his life and sayings, see Rosweyde, Vital
Patrum, pp. 518, 532, 584, 594, 609 ff.; Tillemont, Mémoires,
tom. viii. p. 348.
* See Palladius, Hist. Laus., chap. xix. (Rosweyde, Vitae
Patrum, p. 719 ff.).
2 No, a rare word.
<pb n="574"/>anchorite and ascetic, by whose hands the Lord com-
pleted a holy monastery in the district of Birtâ towards
the end of his life, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="328"/> and with him was the
holy Abba Gabriel who also triumphed in this mona-
stery. But before we involve ourselves in these histories
and write down their noble deeds for prudent readers,
we will lift ourselves above our narrative a little, and
introduce into this history [some] mention of the holy
anchorites who lived in this country, by whose rays
our part of the world was illumined, and who made
the country of Margå to possess a splendid appear-
ance [such] as it never possessed before; and they
made it the abode of their holiness, and the scene of
their labours in the caves, and habitations, and monas-
teries which they planted therein. I speak³ now con-
cerning the holy Monastery of Rishâ, in which accord-
ing to what the historians of times and kings say,
seven Bishops lived at the beginning, but in which
subsequently many [more] lived; and the Monastery of
the holy Mår Ephraim the monk, who lived for the
`whole period of his life in a double' cave, [which was
situated] in a place called "Ammîkê” or “Naḥlâ dhě
* All the MSS. have a but we should probably read
Mado
In the text p. 65, 1. 13, this word is pointed
the Urmi edition of the Old Test. 1852 we have D
13, p. 978).
but in
(Daniel i.
3 The passage beginning on p. 328, 1. 8, and ending on
p. 330, 17, is quoted in B. O., iii. I. p. 495, col. 2, p. 496,
col. 2.
* See Hoffmann, Auszüge. p. 201.
5 1982 κάλιο και το σπήλαιον τὸ διπλούν by which the LXX
.17 .See Genesis xxiii אֶת־מְעָרַת הַמַּכְפַּלָה .rendered the Heb
<pb n="575"/>
Nahra", far away from all human intercourse and affairs;
and also of the blessed 'Anân-isho, that famous and
triumphant man, whose monastery which was [situated]
above Hețârâ excelled preeminently in mighty deeds and
miracles; and of the holy Mâr Ith Allâhâ, 3 who passed his
- whole life in the perfection of ascetic acts and deeds
in a small hole in the rock above the village of Lalêsh;*
and of the blessed Åsho Râḥmêh, to the name of whose
piety the Monastery of Beṭmâ³ was built, the glorious
things of whose shrine are still spoken of by the wise
and prudent; and of the blessed Ḥebhisha whose booth
was fixed near the village of Hennes,' and the resting
place of whose bones and of those of the holy men
who were his companions was revealed in our days
by the hands of venarable men;-<pb type="textAllignment"  n="329"/> now when
thou goest into that cave and seest the crosses hewn
out of rock [which] hath never [before] been subject
to the [chisel of] steel, fixed there as marks of honour
I. c., the Zâb. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 201, note 1594.
2 See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 223.
seems to be the incorrect Nestorian pronunciation ܐܝܬ ܐܠܞܐ 3
of compare B. O., I. p. 394, note 2, and
'Abalas Payne Smith, Thes., col. 174.
existeth."
means "God
* Assemânî has . This village is situated on a tribu-
tary of the Hazir, and is to be identified with the Lailesh or
Lêlesh of Yakut; see Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 197.
5 I. e., The monastery of the terebinth.
6 Hoffmann thinks that
is a modest description of a
church; compare sombro. . . .
(Syriac text).
9 .1 ,408 .p ܡܛܠܬܗ ܕܢܨܝܚ
7 I. c., Bavian; see Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 223.
8
- Das "hard iron," i. e., "steel." See Duval,
Lexicon, p. 222; Hoffmann, Sr. Arab. Glossen, No. 992, p. 38;
<pb n="576"/>for a testimony of the holiness of those monks, and
how the tablets above their coffins are hewn out, and
how little holes (or channels) have been left [in the
coffins] for the sweet odour from their dust³ [to come
out], thou must marvel and admire-and also of the holy
Mar Addai, whose Monastery was called Râmâ, the
strength of which testifies to the solitude of his dwell-
ing place, in which, according to what is said, many
mighty deeds and miracles were wrought for all men.
And of this company were the holy Gregory, whose
holy monastery was [situated] near the village of
Berběli; and the blessed Mâr Isaac the ascetic, who
made his habitation in the territory of the village
and Payne Smith, Thes., col. 300. The form si, i. c., στó̟µшµа
also occurs; see Payne Smith, Thes., col. 2601.
* Assemânî has des sacs aly.
2 We are here reminded of the serdabs in the Egyptian
tombs of the early dynasties, in the walls of which channels
were hewn that the dead man might smell the odour of the
incense, which was burnt by his surviving relatives and friends
in the large chamber of the tomb, on certain days of the year.
.ܕܚܕܝܝܗܘܢ Assemani has ܢ
,is a better reading ܕܚܣܝܢܘܬܐ but ,ܕܚܣܝܪܘܬܐ Assemani has 4
for Thomas of Margà means to tell us that the Monastery of
Râmâ was a strongly built structure, part dwelling-place, part
fortress, and that it was sufficiently strong to withstand the
attacks of the Kurds and other predatory tribes.
5 The village of Berběli or Barbeli is mentioned in connexion
with Tellà ( 1½ B. O., iii. 1. p. 569, col. 1. 1. 10-
SJB. O., iii. 1. p. 564, col. 2, 1. 22), and may pro-
bably be compared with the Be-Rberri mentioned by Badger
(Nestorians, vol. I. p. 397) as belonging to the diocese of
Gawar; see B. O., iii. ii. p. 728; and Hoffmann, Auszüge,
p. 222, note 1762. Tellà lay on the east side of the Upper
Zâb, north of Walto, and south of Julamerk.
I
<pb n="577"/>
Ḥarbai, and lived a life remote from all visible things;
and the blessed Mår John, concerning whom we will
speak later, who dwelt in a cave like unto a grave in
a place which is called Nêrabh Barzai,' and who wrought
signs and wonders like the Apostles in the conversion
of the village of Ķôph³ to belief [in Christ]; and the
blessed Mår Abhâ, who built a monastery in a mountain
ravine on the Outer Rishâ above the village of Bêth
Zeâța, which is Bêth Sâţî, where he ended his days,
at a good old age, and in a course of life which was
superior to the world; and the blessed Mar Abraham,"
the dust of whose limbs worketh many mighty deeds
unto this day. And a fellow-worker of his was the
holy Mar Aḥâ, who ended the strife of his life of an
anchorite in a little cave in a mountain gorge near
the Zâb, and he was a fountain of help to all the countries
round about him. Now these men were, according to
what the early writers say concerning them, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="330"/>
bishops and ascetics. And at the time when the
abominable doctrine of Arius 6 the heretic was blazing forth,
* Assemânî has 5;, and a place of this name is men-
tioned by Bar-Hebraeus, Chronicon, p. 320, 1. 17.
2 Nêrabh Barzai or Nêrabh Barâzi was situated not far from
Kôph and near 'Akrâ; see Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 225.
3 See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 225; and Badger, Nestorians,
vol. 1, p. 101.
* A place named after a man 5.6. According to the Syriac
version of Pseudo-Callisthenes, (ed. Budge, p. 95, 1. 14) has
may be an abbreviation of some name ike ܜ but ,ܗܩܛܘܪ —
Σatiẞáplavns; compare Horn and Steindorff, Sassan. Gemmen.
p. 32.
5 The name of the place where he lived is omitted by
the MSS.
6 Arius, Apelos, was born early in the second half of the
.
dddd
<pb n="578"/>during the reign of Valens' the Emperor and of his
wicked companions, who tyrannically persecuted the
orthodox who would not accept their doctrine,' by reason
of the insolence and cruelty of those who persecuted
them these men fled from the countries of the Greeks,
and came to this land of the east, and preferred rather
to live in tribulation, and in banishment from their native
lands and relatives, than to be near their persecutors,
and to be tormented by acquiescence with the diseased
doctrine of heretics.
Now once, when [the sense of] what was right urged
me to go round about and to pray in their caves where
they had lived, I went into them with great reverence,
and I understood the affliction and tribulation of their lives,
to which the very places where they lived testify, and
I was exceedingly sorry and very much grieved, and
at once I blamed the teachers who were found in their
days, [teachers who] perhaps had been esteemed worthy
to see these men, or to behold their wonderful works,
because [the sense of] what was right had not urged
and obliged them to set down in writing some matters
of the noble acts and deeds of such anchorites as
3rd century A. D., and died at Constantinople A. D.
336. For his life and doctrines see Sozomen, Hist. Eccles.,
1. 15; Socrates, Hist. Eccles., I. 4, 38; Theodoret, Hist. Eccles.,
1. 5; Epiphanius, Haeres. 69. 6, 60; Rufinus, Hist. Eccles., 1.
13; Gibbon, Decline and Fall, chap. XXI.
Emperor of the East A. D. 364-378. The Nestorians al-
ways write Walis for Valens; see Payne Smith, Thes., col. 1064.
See Gibbon, Decline and Fall, chap. XXV; and Tillemont,
Mémoires, tom. VI.
.ܠܝܘܠܦܢܗ Assemani has 3
.ܢܬܪܢܩܘܢ Hoffmann vould read ܀
<pb n="579"/>
these; for it is more evident than the sun³ at noon-day
that signs, and mighty deeds, and noble acts must have
been exhibited by them to the believing men who lived
in their days. And when I had returned from there,
that is to say from the clefts and holes of the holy
men in the rocks above, I went also into the Monastery
of the holy Mâr Cyprian the ascetic, which was situated
in the vicinity of [the caves of] these holy men, and
I enquired also concerning the holy men who were
therein, and if they had any histories of them in their
possession which I could read, and with which I could
satisfy my eager desire [to know] their triumphs. And
the brethren who were therein brought out and gave
to me some incomplete narratives, in which there were,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="331"/> however, some few materials relating to the
triumphs of the mighty deeds of the holy Rabban Cyprian,
and of the blessed Gabriel, and of Paul his brother,
from which I could learn whence they came, and how
and where they became disciples, and how they lived,
and in what manner they ended their days. And when
I had gone through them, although they were written
in a simple manner by men who loved God, I thanked
our Lord and offered up grateful thanks for the gift of
the zeal of the ascetic brethren who lived in this
monastery during the life-time of these fathers, who
had not been negligent like the early [writers] and
passed over all the noble acts and deeds of these holy
men. And I dared-now such boldness as this is praise-
worthy, because it stirreth up those who listen to the
* All the MSS. have Aas, but it is evident that some such
word as xx is required.
<pb n="580"/>praise of God-to collect from the materials of their
most excellent works a spiritual treatise in writing, upon
which the brethren [and] ascetics who are in this mon-
astery may meditate, as well as the priests and believing
men who are desirous of hearing about the glorious
works of these men who are [now] captains of the hosts
of the kingdom of heaven. Now first we will make ready
our discourse to speak concerning the thrice blessed
and holy Rabban Cyprian the ascetic, and we will set
down in writing the blessed things of his victorious
deeds before wise and prudent readers and listeners,
for he lived a long time before Rabban Gabriel, and
he was the origin and father of this holy assembly.
We will begin, then, to relate [his] history, and may
the Divine grace through his prayers be with us, and
may our discourse, through Christ Who strengthened
him, be a benefit [to all].
Here endeth the Prologue and First Chapter.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="332"/>
CHAPTER II.
OF THE ORIGIN OF THE BLESSED CYPRIAN, AND OF HIS
TRAINING AT SCHOOL, AND OF HIS GOING TO JERUSALEM..
There is in the country of Margâ a district, the
name of which is Bîrtâ, and in this district is a village,
See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 223.
<pb n="581"/>
the name of which is Bêth Magûshâ,' and it would
seem that it received its name and title from the
leaning which its former lords and inhabitants had to
Magianism, and from this village the blessed Cyprian
is said to have sprung. And having been born of
believing parents, he was brought up by them in an
excellent manner, and carrying out the Apostolic com-
mand which [saith], "Fathers, provoke not your children,
but bring them up in the instruction and teaching of
our Lord", they laboured with all their might in the
teaching of the blessed Cyprian; and because a new
plant maketh use of everything, and the Lord knoweth
those that are His, grace at an early period manifested
in him the sign of its working. And having read for
a short time the Psalms and the subjects which children
are taught in their village church, 3 he arrived at the
state of being a young man, when every man doeth
his own will and pleasure, without let or hindrance, and
he chose these things which belong to the Spirit, and
dedicated himself to the service of the Lord, and
wandered about as a pilgrim in foreign countries. So
then he departed to the holy school in the village of
Maķķabhâ—now it was flourishing greatly during his
* In B. O., iii. 1. pp. 142, 497, Assemânî writes
but another spelling occurs in Isho'-yahbh's letter to Mâr‘Ammeh
(No. 26) where, at the beginning he writes to him:-bis.
NOP MASA DAN ON: 2007
2
Ephesians vi. 4; Colossians iii. 21.
20001 500
3 For an account of the subjects taught in the schools, see
B. O., . ii. p. 919ff.
This was one of the schools founded by Mår Bâbhai; see
Bk. ii. chap. 2, supra, p. 296.
<pb n="582"/>days-where he was thoroughly trained in all the
glorious doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, and in the
books on the dispensation of life, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="333"/> and in
expositions of them. And when he arrived at the state
of perfect manhood, because he like Samuel, and
Jeremiah, and the other holy men, had been set apart
aforetime to be a soldier and a member of the house-
hold of the heavenly Lordship, and because he had
been ordained to be the cause of great benefits at a
time when [important] matters began to run their
course, He that knoweth hidden things, and things which
are about to happen, and things which are afar¸ off,
did not fail to give to that blessingworthy person an
indication of His providential dispensation that he should
become and be called a portion of eternity. And with
what result? He inflamed his heart and set on fire his
mind with the desire, hotter than fire, of going to Jerusa-
lem to see the holy place where Christ our Lord
manifested to mankind His bodily dispensation for
the sake of their redemption. And being involved in
this thought and determination he prepared to begin the
plan of his journey with hot and zealous steps directed
thither, and having renounced earthly love, and made
himself an alien to the love for parents, and brethren,
and human kind, and all his kindred, he laid upon
himself the holy Book of the Gospels, and thus like
an athlete he began to depart; and he brought his
journey to an end in hot haste, letting pass places of
tarrying for rest,' like a man who hurries home to his
father's house and to his family whom he hath not
*Read "halting stations."
<pb n="583"/>
seen for a long time. And when he had arrived in
Jerusalem and had worshipped in all the holy places,
the place where Christ was baptized in the Jordan,ª
Read
St. Matthew iii. 13-17; St. Mark i. 5-11. Two places
for fording the Jordan are mentioned in the Old Testament:
one was over against Jericho (Joshua ii. 7; Judges iii. 28), and
the other was at Bethabara (St. John I. 28), which is probably
to be identified with the modern Makta" or "place of passage."
It is nowhere stated expressly where Christ was baptized, but
it is thought by some that His baptism by St. John took place
at the upper ford. Tradition proves that from a very early
date pilgrims believed that the baptism of Christ took place
here, and the existence of the ruins of the Monastery of
St. John (Kasr el-Yehudi) which was built over the cave in
which St. John is said to have lived, near this spot at a short
distance from the river, lends support to the belief. As early
as the time of Constantine baptism in the Jordan was con-
sidered a blessed thing, and in the 6th century pilgrims crowded
thither from all parts; see Robinson, Biblical Researches, vol. iii.
p. 353ff.; Reland, Palaestina, pp. 271-279; Socin and Baedeker,
Palestine and Syria, p. 266. Antoninus Martyr, who visited
Palestine about 570, says:-“……. venimus in locum, ubi bapti-
zatus est dominus noster. In ipso loco transierunt filii Israel;
ibi et filii prophetarum perdiderunt securim et ex ipso loco
assumptus est Elias. In ipso loco est mons Hermon modicus,
qui legitur in Psalmo." At this spot both banks of the river
were paved with marble steps, and a wooden cross rose in the
middle of the stream
"est crux lignea intus in aqua et
gradus descendunt usque ad aquam ex utraque parte marmoris."
Antonini Placentini Itinerarium, ed. Gildemeister, Berlin, 1889,
8vo. pp. 7, 9. Tuch's Antoninus Martyr, seine Zeit und seine
Pilgerfahrt nach dem Morgenlande, Leipzig 1864, may be con-
sulted upon this subject with advantage.
<pb n="584"/>.
and the Temple,' and Golgotha, and the Sepulchre,³
and the Upper Chamber, and the Mount of Olives,³
[places] in which the redemption of our race by a Son
It is difficult to understand what Temple Rabban Cyprian
Ican have seen at Jerusalem. The first Temple was built by
Solomon (2 Samuel vii. 5 ff.), and all the arrangements were
identical with those in the Tabernacle of Moses; the second
Temple was built by Zerubbabel when the Jews returned from
the Captivity about B. C. 510; and the third and greatest of
the Temples was built by Herod and burnt down at the siege
of Jerusalem by Titus A. D. 70. Julian the Apostate wished
the Jews to return to Jerusalem and tried to rebuild their Temple,
and before the end of the Vth century crowds of pilgrims ar-
rived yearly to visit the places made sacred by Christ. Jerusalem
suffered greatly at the hands of the Persians A. D. 614 and
many of its churches were destroyed; in 637 it was conquered
by the Arabs. It is thus clear that very little of any ancient
building can have been left in Jerusalem by the time Rabban
Cyprian arrived there.
* See Socin and Baedeker, Palestine, pp. 189-201; and
Antoninus, ed. Gildemeister, p. 14, No. 19.
3 The site of the Holy Sepulchre was discovered in the time
of Constantine, but previously it is said to have been occupied
by a Temple of Venus. The church which he built there was
dedicated A. D. 336. For the topography of Jerusalem see
D'Anville, Sur Pancien Férusalem, Paris, 1747; Tillemont,
Histoire des Empereurs, Brussels 1732, tom. ii. p. 121-132,
tom. iv. p. 107; Le Bruyn, Voyage au Levant, p. 288; Itine-
rarium Hierosol. ed. Wesseling, p. 592; Ammianus Marcellinus
xxiii. 1; Warburton, Julian, London 1751, and the passages
quoted by him; and De Vogüé, Le Temple de Jérusalem, Paris,
1863; Besant, Ferusalem, London 1888; Warren, Ferusalem,
London 1884; Wilson, Jerusalem, London 1889.
St. Mark xiv. 14; St. Luke xxii. II.
5 See Antoninus, ed. Gildemeister, p. 12. This pilgrim
kissed the wood of the Cross and handled the label which was
above it, and he saw the sponge and the reed (p. 15).
<pb n="585"/>
of our nature was completed, his soul rejoiced, and
his spirit was satisfied, and he rested from the toil and
weariness of his way; and he praised and glorified Him,
by trust in Whom he had been anxious to travel and to
see the places which the adorable footsteps [had
trodden]. From thence he set out to go to Mount Sinai
in Arabia, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="334"/> and in this mountain [he went into]
the cave' in which the blessed Moses had lived, and
in which the Lord shewed him the constitution of all
this universe, and where he composed the words of
the Spirit, and where also God had spoken with
Elijah³ the great Prophet, and he offered up the sacri-
fice of praise to the Lord like sweet-smelling odours;
and our Lord made His light to shine upon the under-
standing of the holy young man, and He prepared
him to journey uprightly along the path in which there
is no blame. From thence he directed the course of
his journey straight to Alexandria, and from this [city]
he went to the Egyptian desert, * where he stayed
* At the N. E. angle of the rock which bears the chapel,
which is built on a small plateau at the top of Gebel Mûsâ
(i. ., the "Mountain of Moses"), to the left is a hollow, where
Moses is said to have stood when the glory of the Lord passed
by, and the monks show the impression of the prophet's head
and shoulders on the stone. The tradition is to the effect that
Moses remained fasting for forty days in a hollow resembling
a cistern near the mosque, while writing the Ten Commandments.
See Lepsius in Baedeker's Egypt, p. 501.
2 I. e., the Ten Commandments. - 777 (Exodus xx.
1). Compare "Et ascendimus in montem continuo milia tres,
et venientes ad speluncam, ubi absconditus fuit Elias, quando
fugit ante Iezebel". Antoninus, p. 27.
31 Kings xix. 9.
4 I. c., the Desert of Scete. See supra, p. 39, note 3.
eeee
<pb n="586"/>some time going about among the monasteries of the
holy men who lived in the desert; and he worshipped
at the graves of the righteous and holy Antonius,*
and Pachomius,' and Evagrius, ³ and Arsenius,* and
Macarius, and Serapion." And from the sight of the
holy men who were there and from their labours he
gained a good type and example for himself. And
just as the bee that is skilful in her handicraft formeth
and buildeth up the honeycomb' in her dwelling from
[various] herbs and grasses, so also did this holy man
gather together habits of the monastic life from each
of the holy men and did perfect them in himself; and
having become initiated into all the monastic life, and
* See supra, p. 30. According to Antoninus Anthony was
buried at Alexandria (p. 32).
See Book IV. chap. 9, supra, p. 396.
3 See supra, p. 51, note I.
4 See supra, p. 29, note 3.
5 See supra, p. 51, note 4.
6 Serapion the Sindonite is described by Palladius as follows:-
2007, 2nd
907 shop pants op (2 1/2
Se orde og så jeg og spil para
2007
pada pelas 2007 No D2.007 ss No
2012
opada
of
foo hapani kubbej
No. No
20
(fol. 1046). Every farthing of money which he obtained he
Igave away to those poorer than himself, and to do deeds of
charity he fasted four or five days at a time. Palladius says
that he visited Rome and Athens, and that he died at the age
See Tillemont, Mémoires, tom. viii. p. 348,
of sixty-two.
col. 2.
7 Read
<pb n="587"/>
having endued himself with the venerable garb³ of the
monks in one of the monasteries of the orthodox which
were there, and having laboured in the service of the
community according to the canon of the fathers, and
having lived in that monastery a considerable time, the
chosen vessel deemed that henceforth he might become
an anchorite.
CHAPTER III.
OF THE DEPARTURE OF THE HOLY CYPRIAN FROM THE
DESERT TO AN ISLAND OF GREECE.
Now the holy Cyprian <pb type="textAllignment"  n="335"/> heard of a solitary island
in the territory of the Greeks in which palms and
fruits for food were found, and although there might
be men living there he would have no need for the
services of man; and he persuaded certain traders of
the sea, and they carried him in their ship and brought
him thither. And when he had gone into the interior
he praised God, the Lord of all, who had prepared
that place for him, and he rejoiced in it and loved it,
and it seemed to him as if he were in the Paradise
of Eden. And thus he took advantage of tranquil
solitude to fast, and also to pray and to sing Psalms,
and from these [arose] prayer and supplication, which
[lasted] day and night, to Him Who loved and Who
walked [over] sea and land to fulfil His will in the
1. e. σxñµа habitum monachalem; see Usener, Der
Heilige Theodosios, Leipzig, 1890, p. 171 (note to p. 73. 3).
Hoffmann would read 2007 "[he benefited by] a
contemplative disposition to pray and to sing psalms".
<pb n="588"/>renunciation of every thing. Now he tarried there a
long time without the knowledge of [any] man, de-
lighting in the desert and training himself in all the
most severe and minute details and particulars of the
ascetic life, at the same time sparingly sustaining
his life with dates and vegetables and herbs which
he took from the earth. How many were the fierce
strifes and afflictions which this valiant athlete endured
there from the passions of the body and the wickedness
of obstinate devils it is not for us to write; but those
who have occupied themselves for a long time with
the affairs of the solitary life and with the life of an
anchorite [know] how hard it is to lead that life, and
how difficult, and what fierce enemies attack the wretched
monk, and how he eateth [his bread] day and night
with the tears of his eyes, and with bitterness. As for
consolation it is far from him; as for wars, they sur-
round him on all sides; and helpers he has none. So
then, considering contests and strifes of absolute neces-
sity he was entirely collected in his mind, and he
was afraid lest the thought which awoke in him irri-
tatingly would put an end to his contemplation, and
* Hoffmann thinks that here there is an allusion to λauµà
Gaẞaxaví,
(St. Matthew xxvii. 46).
2 The MSS. have but we should have expected
"its twinings" (or twistings, intricacies, ramifications).
For examples of the use of this word compare
Aphraates, ed. Wright, p. 137, 1. 19; also "atra
erat nox", Sancti Ephraem Syri, ed. Lamy tom. I. p. 437, L. 10;
Wright, Apocryphal Acts, vol. 1. p. 183,
2207 on
,Land, Anecdota ܫܠܠܐ ܕܕܘܒܩܝܗܝܢ ܕܒܝܕ ܫܘܝܬܐ ܣܢܝܬܐ ܕܣܥܟܐ ܘܕܥܡܪܐ ;6 .1
tom. ii. p. 216, 1. 28; and 2w Dozy, Supplément, tom. I.
p. 670.
<pb n="589"/>
would destroy in the twinkling of an eye all his life-
long labour; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="336"/> for, as Paul saith, his contest
"was not against flesh and blood, but with principalities
and powers, and against the rulers of darkness of this
world, and against evil spirits under the heavens"." His
labour was [his] furnace, that [he might go forth] like
gold which is tried and tested by the fire. There in
the desert he was victorious, and he was profited by
afflictions by which as the body melted away and
gradually disappeared, the soul shone and became
radiant to meet the riches of glorious things after its
sufferings and afflictions; for in proportion as the soul
entereth into sublime things and becometh exalted,
so do its fierce enemies attack it. So then [we cannot]
relate concerning the strifes of this mighty man of
strength, for they are secret and hidden from us.
Now after he had tarried there for the space of
many years he became known even unto the traders
in this wise: it came to pass that they once
touched that island to brace up their ship which had
been greatly shaken by the violence of the waves, and
certain of the crew wandered about hither and thither
in the island. And they had heard about him from
those who had brought him over there when he first
came to that island, and when they saw from a distance
the palm trees of his garden they knew that the man
of God dwelt there. And they went, and found him,
and drew near to him, and were blessed by the holy
Iman whom they sought, and they left with him some
of their provisions, and received a blessing from him
and departed. And this was the cause of his being
* Ephesians vi. 12.
<pb n="590"/>perceived there by men and becoming well known. And
after his strugglings and strivings which [took place]
there our Lord made him to flourish in all the excel-
lence of a perfect ascetic life, and not only were healed
those who came to him, but even those who were afar
off, and who could not see him, when they called upon
the name of the God of Cyprian the anchorite, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="337"/>
speedily received healing of their sicknesses. And
likewise also the seamen who went down into the sea,
when they were in trouble through the raging of the
sea, [called upon] the name of the holy man, and the
waves became quiet by his prayer, and the billows of
the sea subsided. Now when he had lived full forty
years in that desert, and had gathered to himself
riches of which he could not be despoiled, and had
laid up all his treasure in heaven above, according to
the Redeeming word, and had received from the Lord
all things which could perfect His will, and had become
instead of a creature of soul and body, a man of the
Spirit, the holy angel of the Lord appeared to him in a
vision, [and told him] to return without delay to the
country of Margå, and to build a monastery for ascetics
on the border of his village, and to become a spiritual
father and a director of solitaries. Now Divine Goodness
(is accustomed to work in this [manner], even as it did
in the case of Moses the Great (whom after he had
been the shepherd of a dumb flock for forty years,'
it raised up to lead and direct the thousands and ten
thousands of Israel), and many others; for they were
first of all trained and exercised in the solitude of the
1 St. Matthew vi. 20.
2 See Acts vii. 23, 30, 36.
<pb n="591"/>
desert and mountains, and were afterwards appointed
by God and brought to rule over those who led the
life of solitaries, and over the Church.
CHAPTER IV.
OF THE COMING OF RABBAN CYPRIAN TO THIS COUNTRY
OF MARGA, AND OF HOW HE WAS REVEALED AND
BECAME KNOWN IN THIS PLACE.
Now this holy man, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="338"/> having received from
the Lord this permission, changed the place in which
he had lived for forty years pleasing God, as was right,
- and crossed the sea, and returned to this country. And
it happened before his coming here that the village of
Bêth Magushê,' which was the home of his parents,
had been laid waste, and so, Divine Grace leading him,
he came and dwelt in the wood which is below the
monastery [which he afterwards built]. Now aforetime
the place was such that fierce wild animals dwelt therein,
and even with the blessed man Cyprian, according to
what is written concerning him, during the whole of the
time in which he lived in the wood without any man
being aware of his presence, there lived two lions,
which not only did not do him harm, but stood tran-
quilly before him like innocent lambs.* His food was
.ܒܝܬ ܡܓܟRead E -
2 The Abbot Sergius dismissed a lion with his blessing and
the lion departed; a lion pointed out the way to an anchorite
who had lost his way near the town of Sochus; and Macarius
had two lions which brought back food to him each night and
which he named "Filioli mei, boni fratres." See Rosweyde,
<pb n="592"/>grass and other green herbs and vegetables which [grew]
on this river, but because he had ordered and set himself
apart for the benefit of many people he did not tarry-
long here before men came to know about him and to
see him. And in the days of snow the young men of
Nirâm dhe Râ âwâthâ, a village [situated] above the mon-
astery, went forth, and they took (crossed) river after
river that they might find wild animals to hunt, and
they had with them powerful dogs, and with slings³
and outcries they surrounded the wood, in which was
the blessed old man, for they saw the tracks of the
wild animals which were gathered together to the old
man. And when they had made much noise, being in
fear and terror of lions, and saw that there was no lion,
there, they went into the wood [thinking] that perchance
they might find some animal therein; and when they
had gone in they saw a little shelter built above a
ravine, like that which wild animals make in the ground,
and when they had looked hither and thither they saw
the man of God sitting half hidden in his cave. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="339"/> And
they pointed their spears at him boldly and threatened
[to slay] him, for they did not know that he was a
holy man, but he spake with them gently, and went
forth, and blessed them, and gave them words of
encouragement, saying, "I am one of the company of
Vitae Patrum, pp. 228, col. 2; p. 893, col. 2; and p. 911,
col. 2.
See supra, Bk. iii. chap. 7, supra, p. 322, note 6.
2 I. e., the Hâzer; see Book vi. chap. 6, Syriac text, p. 344,
1. II.
3 Syr.
weapons much used by peasants; compare
, Hoffmann, Julianos der Abtrünnige, Leiden,
1880, p. 162, 1. 16.
"
<pb n="593"/>
wandering mendicants. I came here last night, and to-
day I shall go away. Go back to your village, and
behold a stag will meet you, take him and slay him,
and so depart to your houses;" then they went forth
from him quickly that they might inform their fathers
concerning him. Now when they had gone away about
a stone's throw, from that part of the wood' [where] the
old man [was] they found the stag of which he had
spoken to them caught by his horns in the branches of
the forest, and they took him and slew him, and went
in to their village, and they quickly informed the people
thereof concerning that old man. Then the whole
village came out, and ran swiftly to the old man that
they might see and become acquainted with the anchorite
who had been sent to help them; the wise physician
who was able to heal their sicknesses without payment;
the merchant who was laden with much riches which
he might spend for their benefit; the spiritual father
who was able, like the son of 'Amram,' to stand before
the breaches of those who afflicted them; and the man
who became altogether like Paul;³ that they might see
John in the Jordan, and hear his voice encouraging sinners
to repentance; [and] Elijah the prophet who would burn
up and destroy the evil companys of heretics as he
3, a rare example of the use of the fem. of
21. c., Moses. See Psalm cvi. 23.
3 Compare Acts xvi. 23; Acts xix. 11; Acts xxi. 33;
2 Corinthians xi. 26, etc.
4 St. Matthew iii. 2.
5 band, company, flock, troop, in a bad sense. Compare
Brit جسدة القطيع من الخنازير ويقال ايضا بالاستعاره الشياطين
Mus. Orient. 7203, fol. 1816, col. I, and Orient. fol. 372a,
col. I.
ffff
<pb n="594"/>burned up the children of Baal.' And when they had
come to him, and had gone in and seen this holy old
Iman they bowed themselves down to the ground before
the ascetic and recluse, and they drew near [to him] and
kissed the old rags of his clothing. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="340"/> Now the blessed
Iman perceived no one of them, for he remained before
them lying on his face with his eyes streaming with tears,
and the man who had led the life of an anchorite for forty
years was not able to look boldly upon [any] man in that
gathering. And while they were waiting and entreating
him that he would hold them to be worthy of the blessings
of his prayers, he answered and said to them, "Rise up
now, my children, and go to your homes, for behold
the head and governor of the churches of this country
will come to your village this evening, and as for me
I shall remain here to-morrow and the day following;"
and he blessed them and said farewell to them. Thus
they left him, and departed from him, and according to
the words of our master, "[he will come] at the eventide
of this day", there came to them the pious and holy
Metropolitan of the country, as he was going round
visiting his flocks and nourishing the people of his
pasture, according to our Lord's command to him." And
when they were gathered together to that holy head,
they related to him concerning the manifestation of
that mighty man of God, and at the same time con-
cerning his asceticism and his venerable appearance,
and concerning the self-abnegation and voluntary poverty
which they had seen in him, and how he had informed
1 Kings xviii. 40.
2 St. John xxi. 15-17.
3 I. e., Hosɔ̃? See Bk. iii. chap. 2.
<pb n="595"/>
them, saying that "at the eventide of this day the coming
of thy holiness would take place." And when the holy
father had heard these things, he went down to the
holy man in the morning of the morrow with a great
assembly of priests and teachers and scholars of the
school of Şâwrâ; and when the blessed old man per-
ceived that it was the Head of the Church who had
come to him, he rose up without delay and went forth
to meet him. And the holy Bishop saw him from afar,
bent, and bowed, and supporting himself on a small
staff, and bowing, and falling down, and rising up, and
he hastened towards him <pb type="textAllignment"  n="341"/> and fell upon his face
before the feet of the Metropolitan. And the holy
Bishop marvelled greatly at the unexampled sight
which he saw in the blessed man, for by reason of the
long endured burden of his labours he appeared to be
like unto a spectre. ³ Then the holy old man wept,
and said to the Bishop, "Why did I not come to thee,
like a servant to the feet of his lord, instead of thy
coming to me, O holy father, [seeing that] I am a sinner
[who is bound] to bow down to thy greatness?" (Hail
to the humility which is so superior! Hail to mind
[which] beareth wisdom!)* "For (I) know that honour
is due to the priesthood, and for this reason I have
come with tears to meet him to whom the ministry of the
priesthood hath been entrusted, and not like a man who
hath been reared in a desert country, and who is not
I
ܚܘܛܪܐ rare diminuive from ,-ܛܪܘܢܐ or ܚܘܛܪܘܬܐ
2
3
Ethpha'al "bowing himself down."
from ✓ ✓; see Payne Smith, Thes., col. 1470;
Duval, Lexicon, col. 809.
4 This is a parenthetical observation by Thomas of Margâ.
<pb n="596"/>acquainted with the estimation in which the fathers are
held, and who hath in his hole in the rock become
neglectful and remiss, and who considereth the honour-
ing of that man not to be among things which are
necessities." And when both of these holy men had
been blessed by each other Mår Bishop asked the
blessed man by degrees to tell him about the manner
of his coming here, and from what place he made his
way to us; and having informed him about lesser
matters he omitted [to speak] of great matters. Then
the Bishop rose up and took the old man by his
hand and led him round this place where a temple and
monastery should be, and in the words of the Lord
he said to him, "This is thy portion, build, finish,
receive the brethren, and teach disciples, and may the
Lord be pleased by thy labour, and by all the course
which thou runnest in His commands. For thou shalt
increase and become abundant, and thy seed shall in-
herit the lands which are round about thee, and with
the hosts of ascetics which thou shalt beget shalt thou
meet the face of the Judge on the day of His coming;"
and he marked out for him the dimensions of the
temple and of the sanctuary, and he departed from
him to [continue] his visitation.
2
* Compare Leviticus vii. 35.
the place of the altar in the apse.
<pb n="597"/>
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="342"/>
CHAPTER V.
OF THE BUILDING OF THIS HOLY MONASTERY BY THE
HANDS OF THE BLESSED MAN.
Then the believing men from these and many other
villages came with all solicitude to the blessed man to
build the temple and the buildings for the community,"
and in a few days the building received conclusion.
And there were gathered together to Rabban an as-
sembly of ascetic brethren, fifty men who were proved
by their wonderful works, and who were stamped with
the likeness of their spiritual father; but the wax' did
not receive the impressions of the gems of the ring,
even although they inscribed upon them the likenesses
of the holy Cyprian, until there lived among them
ascetics who had wrought holy and mighty deeds in
this world. And our Lord sustained [them]; and pro-
vided abundantly all things which were necessary for
their use, and little by little the belief of our Lord was
fully spread abroad by them, and the renown of the
congregation of the holy man was carried into every
place; and [one] might see that through the prayers of
this holy man, this congregation [was] the fountain of
all help which flowed into all parts [of the country].
Now Rabban lived here, from his coming to the day
of his death, twenty years, more or less. And the
I 205-20s, i. e., the buildings for the common use of
the monks; the private cells are not included in this term.
ܘܗܕܐ ܬܘܒ ܕܢ܆ ܕܛܠܝܘܬܐ ܐܝܟ ܩܐܪܘܬܐ Gr. xnpós.
Compare ,ܩܐܪܘܬܐ -
,Land, Anecdota ܪܟܝܟܐ ܕܡܩܒܠܐ ܛܒܥܐ ܕܗܿܘ ܡܕܡ ܕܡܢ ܥܙܩܬܐ ܢܦܠ ܥܠܞ܆
vol. ii. p. 121, 11. 21-23. 2005-
fol. 1486, col. 1.
Brit. Mus. Or. 7203,
See also Payne Smith, Thes., col. 3737.
<pb n="598"/>blessed man became old and gray, and reached a pro-
longed old age, and his limbs became infirm by reason
of the asceticism of those years which had passed
over him, for he had lived forty years in that island,
and it is well known that he lived [there] upon the
meagre fare of green herbs and of the fruit of palms,
and [during] the twenty [years] which he lived in this
monastery he supported his life with dry bread only;
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="343"/> for one of the monks who served in the mon-
astery used to bring to him every evening a piece of
ordinary bread, and a draught of common water only.
And once when the brethren urged him to take part
with them in a meal of cooked food, and he did what
they wished, that food became the cause of an illness,
for he was not accustomed to [eat] such food as that,
and by reason of feebleness in this respect his illness in-
creased, and the end of his term of years arrived, and
the athlete of Christ, who had borne the burden of
the day and its heat from the morning of youth to
the evening of old age in the service of His vineyard,
drew near to rest from his labour; and the conclusion
of the end of the days of this strenuous worker of the
house of our Lord took place with sweaty labours
dripping with the sweat of the new life. He received
revelations from his Lord, and he wrought among us
the mighty deeds and miracles of the Prophets and
Apostles, concerning which, selecting certain parts from
their whole [mass], it is time for us to narrate, and
thus the course of our history draweth towards the
end of the contest of our holy father; and it will be
possible for us by means of the small portion which is
Payne Smith has (Thes., col. 1964)
<pb n="599"/>
[here] written down, to explore for wise and under-
standing [readers-if indeed we have them-] the depth
of all his wonderful deeds, for "he that is faithful in a
little shall become master over much,"
," according to
the word of Him that laid down the contest [for us].
CHAPTER VI.
WHICH MAKETH KNOWN CONCERNING THE WONDERFUL
DEEDS WHICH THE BLESSED CYPRIAN WROUGHT.
The first of the wonders which the blessed Cyprian
wrought in our country is the following, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="344"/> and
the village in which the working of mighty deeds began
was that which first of all perceived his manifestation.
Now it came to pass that while two young men from
Nîrâm, a village of the Shepherds, were tending their
cattle in the fields, it fell out that they were afflicted by
devils in one day; but when their parents had brought
them to Rabban, the power of the Evil One departed
from them straightway, and they ended their lives in
freedom [from him].
And while a certain man was passing at night along
the road by the side of a fire temple of the Magians
which had been a ruin for some time, devils sprang
out upon him in the form of black ravens, and they
entered into him and convulsed him; and since his
kinsfolk and relations had heard concerning the wonders
which had been wrought by the hands of this our Elisha,
they led him in bonds to bring him to him. And when
St. Matthew xxv. 23.
<pb n="600"/>they had crossed the river Ḥâzer to come to this mon-
astery, those devils answered and said to them, “If ye
are going to that impostor Cyprian, we are going to
remain here;" so they departed from the man and left
him. But they nevertheless brought him to Rabban,
and he commanded him not to deprive himself of the
attendance at Church, and the receiving of the Holy
Mysteries, [saying], "the devils shall not be able to draw
nigh to thee again;" and the man undertook [to do
this], and departed in joy.
And on another occasion they brought to him from
the village of Bêth Ķaddîshê, a woman bound with
cord, and with her garments rent by reason of the
violence of the struggling of a devil [with her]; but
when they had brought her and a Ḥenânâ to Rabban,
* The was composed of the dust of some martyr and
oil and water, and was made in the following way:-""Bring,
master, dust from the place in which martyrs have been crowned,
and cast [it] into a vessel into which nothing has fallen except
water and olive oil, throw the dust into the vessel and cast water
thereupon and knead it well together. Bring a little oil in an
other vessel and take a portion of the mass [from the first
vessel], and besmear it with that oil upon thy hand, and then cut it
into pieces like the seals of the Take each single piece
which hath been cut and roll it upon thy left hand, with the
finger of the right hand next to the thumb, until it becometh
as fine as a thread, and lay it upon an outspread napkin which
thou shouldst have before thee, until [the dust] hath come to
an end. Let it dry for one day and one night, and then bring
a Man of Mâr Thomas (i. e., a made of the relics of
Mâr Thomas the Apostle) and cast it in the form of a cross
into that vessel in which thou hast made the mass of dust, oil
and water, and say, This is signed and sanctified by this
No of Mar Thomas the Apostle to the healing and cure
<pb n="601"/>
he signed the sign of the Cross over her, and she was com-
pletely healed, and her kinsfolk and relatives took her
and went away with gladness.
And a certain man from Margå had a paralytic son
who from the womb had never walked, and this man,
having heard of the influence which the prayer of
Rabban possessed with God, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="345"/> and that our
Lord brought to a satisfactory issue every thing
which he commanded, laid the boy upon an ass in
firm belief, and came to this our Simon; and when
he had set him before the feet of the holy old man,
he entreated him with tears to have mercy upon
him. Then Rabban brought forth the oil of prayer
from the sanctuary-now it was a custom of Rabban to
of the body and soul, in the name of the Father and the Son
ܐܝܬܐ ܐܘ ܡܪܝ ܥܦܪܐ ܕܕܘܟܬܐ ܕܬܟܠܠܘ ܒܗ ܤܞܕܐ ”and the Holy Glhost
ܐܝܟ ܚܘܛܐ ܒܨܒܬܐ ܕܝܡܝܢܐ ܕܠܘܬ ܟܪܬܐ. ܘܢܪܘܣܝܗܝ ܥܠ ܣܕܘܬܐ ܢܪܝܣܐ ܕܣܐ
;278 .See B. 0., m. I. p ܕܦܓܤܐ ܘܕܢ ܒܡ ܐܒܐ ܘܒܪܐ ܘܪܘܚܐ ܕܩܘܕܫܐ܀
Payne Smith, Thes., col. 1316; Duval, Lexicon, col. 764; Mai,
Scriptorum Veterum Nova Collectio, tom. v. p. 21. The
Christians who went to Malabar and visited the spot where
Saint Thomas was slain were in the habit of bringing back
with them some of the dust or earth which they mixed
with water and gave sick folk to drink; see B. O., iii. ii.
p. 279.
gggg
<pb n="602"/>have the horn' [of oil] carefully placed in the ¤órxn³—
and when he had anointed the whole body of the boy,
he stepped back from him about ten paces, and calling
the boy by his name, said, "Rise up, and come to me,"
and at the word the boy rose up readily and went to
Rabban. Then Rabban laid his hand upon his head,
and blessed him, and his father took him and went to
his house rejoicing, and every one marvelled and
praised God.
And about that time a pestilence fell upon the
camels in the country of Bêth Garmai. And the be-
lieving men sent to him and asked him to pray
for them, and as soon as their messenger had gone
into the monastery on that very day the pestilence ceased
from their camels; and having received a Ḥenânâ and
returned, they asked him concerning the day on which
he had seen Rabban, and they knew that it was at
that hour that. God had manifested His help to them;
and they praised and glorified God for the power which
the prayer of the holy man possessed, in that while
he himself was in the country of Marga, his prayer
was doing battle with the pestilence³ in Bêth Garmai.
One day they brought a boy to him from Bîrtâ, a
village of Rustaka, with his face turned behind him by the
agency of Satan; and when they had brought him in
to Rabban, he received healing by the holy right hand
of this our father, and he set his face straight, and he
became as he was in former times.
I
Compare 1 of 1 Kings i. 39; and
2 Kings ix. I.
.
2 see supra. 431.
3 All the MSS. have but it is pretty certain that we
.ܡܘܬܠܐ should read
<pb n="603"/>
Once there came to Rabban a man from the country
of Beth Bĕghâsh,' whose name [was] Yahbh Maran,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="346"/> who although he had lived with his wife
for many years had not become the father of children,
and he entreated Rabban that he would consider him
worthy of the help of his prayer. And Rabban
made the sign of the Cross over him with a henânâ
three times, and having dismissed him to his journey
with prayer he departed to his [own] country, and .
there were born to him two sons and one daughter.
And they brought to him from Şeyân, a village of
heretics, a woman whose two legs were paralysed, and
after she had continued in the monastery two days,
lying in the chapel, our Lord gave her healing by the
prayers of the holy man.
And again they brought to him from the provincę
of Gârîn³ a woman who was blind in both eyes-now
this woman belonged to a noble family of rich people,
and she was exceedingly beautiful in appearance-and
by the prayers of the holy man she also received a
complete cure in the appearance and beauty of both her
eyes, and every man praised and glorified God when
they saw the help which that woman had obtained.
[One] night a devil beat a youth from Berbĕli* severely,
and made him foam at the mouth, and on the morrow
in the morning his parents carried him and brought him
1 or was a district situated between Adhôr-
bâîgan and Ardabil; in the eighth century the seat of the
Nestorian bishop was in the church of Bai
See Bk. ii.
chap. 39, supra, p. 236; and Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 227 ff.
* See supra, p. 600.
3 This province is also mentioned in Bk. iii. chap. 2, supra,
p. 296.
4 See supra, p. 576, and Hoffmann, Auszüge, note 1762.
<pb n="604"/>[to the holy man]. And when they had taken him in
to Rabban, he sealed him with the sign of the Cross,
and rebuked the devil according to the word of our Lord,'
and all the brethren being gathered together before
him, he went forth from his mouth like a carrion crow
and flew away and departed; and that boy received
healing and became as he was aforetime.
And they brought to him from Nâhêrmeshi a
. woman who was persecuted by a wicked devil, and by
the prayer of this holy man, the power of our Lord
freed her also from the conflict with that devil.
And a certain man from Şeyân brought to Rabban
his only son who was smitten with a putrid sore, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="347"/>
and Rabban commanded him to go down to the river³
which ran under his cell and to bathe, and by this [means]
he sent away [from him] the whole garment of
that evil sore; and being healed his father took him
with joy and praise of God, and departed to his village.
· Once a man from the village of Beth Talai, who
believed in God and loved Him wholly, fell into a severe
illness, and by reason of its violence his soul was well
nigh departing [from him], and like Hezekiah he sent
to this our Isaiah [asking] that he would visit him with
his prayer. And when the youth had gone forth from
him to come to the monastery, that believing man saw
the angel of the Lord standing above him in the form
of Rabban as if he were offering up prayer on his
behalf, and he was healed completely, and he sat up
St. Matthew xvii. 18.
* See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 217, note 1732.
3 Probably the
4 See Isaiah xxxviii. I. .
<pb n="605"/>
in his bed, and he praised and glorified God; and by
reason of the sound of his praise the people of his
house were disturbed, and they went in and saw [him]
sitting on [his] bed praising God, and he stood up forth-
with and walked. And when the youth came to Rabban
he informed him that he that had sent him was made
whole; and those and such-like wonders were wrought
by this holy man.
.
Once Satan appeared to a man by night in the.
form of a mighty man, and as he neither distinguished
the vision nor the strange power, when Satan called him
by his name, the man answered him readily and as
he spoke Satan entered into him and tortured him.
And his kinsfolk and relatives brought him to Rabban,
and by the holy oil, and the mediation of his right
hand, and by proclaiming over him [the name] of the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, he received
healing and remained whole all his days.
And they brought to Rabban from the village of
Shamrakh a man who was vexed by Satan <pb type="textAllignment"  n="348"/>
and he lacerated all his body with bites; he also
was quickly made whole by the prayers of Rabban,
and returned to his house rejoicing and praising God.
And a certain man had a plot of land which was
sown with beans, and when the fruit was in the pod,³
* a small plot of ground in which corn or vegetables
in 2 Samuel xxiii. 11. See
- ܐܫܟܪܐ ܚܕܐ .were sown
Payne Smith, Thes., col. 407.
22000
مس
1. The word bead is derived from the
Greek кúaμoç, als; see Payne Smith, Thcs., col. 680; Duval,
Lexicon, col. 465.
3 x is the sack or bag in which the seeds of a plant
<pb n="606"/>the worm fell upon all the pods, and tore them to
pieces mercilessly; and when he had brought some of
the pods and shewed [them] to Rabban, Rabban gave
him some water in which the cross which [he wore]
upon him had been washed, and commanded him to
sprinkle it over all his plot of land, and straightway
the plague ceased, and the praise of God increased
through him and flourished.
And again, a certain man had large flocks of sheep,
upon which there once fell a pestilence, and many of
the sheep perished. And the man came to this holy
old man and entreated him to pray against that affliction,
and on the day when he returned from us, and had
. distributed the ḥenânâ over his flock, by the help of
our Lord the pestilence ceased.
And when they had brought to this servant of Jesus
the God of all, a woman whose blood had flowed from
her for a long time, and she was nigh unto death, she
I was healed by the prayer of this blessed old man like
the woman whom Jesus healed.*
In a district called Sâwrâ, which was situated above
the monastery, there lived a famous family of Magians,
عه ذي قشرة يكون فيها بزر النبات مثل are contained; compare
plur.
I, Brit. Mus. Orient. 7203, fol. 180a, col. 2;
Dozy, Supplément, tom. I. p. 754, col. 1;
Lagarde, Praetermissorum, p. 122, No. 55. The plur.
occurs in Ahrens, Das Buch der Naturgegenstände, text, p. 37,
1. 17, trans. p. 60, note 3. In Brit. Mus. Orient. 2441, fol.
371a, col. 2, we have:
Sill is
الدماغ قشر الرمان الرقيق محمد ه ة ك الباقلى وهو احظر
رطب باقماعه يكون فيها بزر النبات .
St. Matthew ix. 20.
<pb n="607"/>
I who had not yet taken upon themselves the bridle of
the worship of God the Life of the worlds, but accord-
ing to the custom of their parents they worshipped fire
and the heavenly bodies. And when these men saw
the mighty deeds and signs which were wrought by the
mediation of this wonderful man, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="349"/> they were over-
come [by] a noble-minded victory, and they spat upon the
object of their worship, and despised the impure doctrine
of Magianism, and came to this light of Christianity,
and entreated him that through him they might become
members of the household for the worship of his God,
for, said they to him, "The God who is worshipped
by thee, O our father, is the true God, and we will be
His servants and adorers as long as He permitteth us
to live in this world, and Magianism is to be denied, to-
gether with all its unclean and polluted muttered prayers."
Then he with great joy shewed and made clear before
them all the glory of Christianity, and of the living
doctrine of the Gospel of Christ our Lord and of those
good things which are above [this] world, and which
are laid up for holy Christians in the world which is
to come, and how in all generations holy men have
pleased God the Creator and Maker of all created
things, and of God the Cause of everything which
exists and is made. And he commanded and made
ready everything which was necessary for the Mys-
teries of holy baptism, and according to the order of
the service of the Holy Church he baptized them with
* Compare "indem der murmelnde Priester mit der Diener-
schaft zwanzig Ellen vom Feuer entfernt sitzt," u. s. w., Hoff-
mann, Auszüge, p. 297..
2 Read
.
<pb n="608"/>his hands in the name of the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Ghost. And he commanded their wives
and children [to be brought], and he baptized them in
the church of Sawrâ their village, and he admonished
them, and said to them, "This day is a marriage feast
made in the heights of heaven above among the ranks
of the holy angels, for if our Lord said, 'The angels
who are in heaven rejoice over the conversion of one
sinner that repenteth', how very much more [will they
rejoice] over the many who have gone into the courts
of the Holy Church, and [whose names] have been
written down and inscribed with the royal stamp of
the money of the kingdom! This day have your names
been written down with [those of] the first who have
been inscribed in heaven; this day have ye cast off
the black garment which the error of the worship of
fire wove for you; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="350"/> this day have ye made
white that soul which was spotted with the polluted
passions of the doctrine of erring devils. Now there-
fore, my beloved, seek the things which are above,*
and let be earnestly desired the things which are above,
and not those which are upon earth, where Christ Whom
ye have put on dwelleth in heaven, for ye are dead
to yourselves, and your lives are hidden with Christ in
God, and when Christ, Who is our Life, shall be re-
vealed, then will ye also be revealed with Him in glory.
Mortify then your members* which are upon earth, forni-
cation, uncleanness, theft, avarice, and idolatry; try
St. Luke xv: 7-10.
2 Colossians iii. I.
3 Colossians iii. 3.
4 Colossians iii. 5.
ܐܡܝܬܘ ܗܟܝܠ ܗܕܡܝܟܘܢ ܕܒܐܪܥܐ. ܙܢܝܘܬܐ ܛܢܦܘܬܐ s The Peshitta has
№5 Se
<pb n="609"/>
everything, and lay hold upon that which is good, and
flee from every evil thing." And the Magians hearkened
unto him graciously and simply, and undertook [to do]
those things which were said by him to them, and they
were mingled among the Catholic Church; and they
were changed from their former manner of life of marry-
ing their mothers, and sisters, and daughters, and they
acted according to the rule of life which Rabban taught
them. And they brought an enlightened and learned
Iman, and he taught 'them the psalms, and hymns, and
holy customs, and observances; and thus they were
made perfect holily in the new man which they had
put on.
And a certain Persian woman having been made by
devils their abode, the poor creature was grievously
vexed by them, and she used to come against every one
who passed near unto her with foul abuse and stone-
throwing; and her kinsfolk having brought her to
Rabban, she tarried in the martyrium the whole night,
and with the dawn our Lord gave to her freedom from
the subjection to the devils. And after she had been
made whole she related to her neighbours, saying, "An
old man came to me in the night, and he laid hold of
those black beings' which clave to me, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="351"/> and he
smote them, and with adjurations forbade them to come
near to me again, and they fled and they have not
[come] again"; and thus being made whole she returned
to her house.
And again, a certain thief once came in the night
1 Thessalonians v. 21.
213, literally, "Ethiopians". Devils often appeared in
the forms of black men; see supra, p. 405.
hhhh
<pb n="610"/>and began to dig through the wall of the xórx of
this monastery that he might carry off the books and
property of the monastery, and having struck two
blows his right hand straightway withered. And in the
morning he went in to Rabban and confessed his folly,
but although Rabban laboured much, and made much
supplication in prayer on his behalf, the man did not
receive healing, and rightly, for it was meet that the
man who had dared to break into the house of God's
worship, which had [but] newly been built, and to
which the blessed brethren had been [but] recently
gathered together, should remain with an uncured
stroke. For in every beginning of [progress] in Divine
things fear and awe are necessary, just as the word of
Simon, the chief of the Apostles, cast fear upon Ananias'
and Sapphira at the beginning of [his] preaching; and
it is written moreover, "If a man sinneth against a
man, let him entreat the Lord and it shall be forgiven
him; but if he sin against the Lord, whom shall he
entreat?" So that wretched man remained with his
withered arm, like Cain in Genesis, ³ and as he was
unable to find food to sustain his life, when he went
begging from door to door and from village to village,
he became the herald of his own punishment.
On another occasion a certain man took away the
silken veil from the martyrium, and as soon as he
1 Acts v. 1-6.
ܐ ܢܚܬܐ ܓܒܪܐ ܒܓܒܪܐ ܢܒܥܐ Samuel ii. 25. The Peshitta has 1 2
* No No
3 Genesis iv. 15.
20
4 Compare 25 531, Budge, Alexander, (text), p. 195,
1. II.
<pb n="611"/>
brought it into his house all his children were vexed
by a devil. And when he saw this he went back to
the monastery, [having] the veil with him, and he bowed
down before Rabban, and confessed his sin, and Rabban
gave him a henânâ and commanded him to give it to
his children to drink, [mixed] with water; and when he
had done this they straightway received healing.
On another day a certain heathen went into the
garden of the monastery, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="352"/> wishing to gather
figs, and the Lord smote him with the sickness of
blindness, and he remained the whole night sitting on
the wall. And when it had dawned and the monks
who served in the monastery came and found him, he
confessed the sin which he had committed, and they
took him in to Rabban who passed his hand over his
eyes, and he received perfect healing and undertook
never to do the like again.
Now when Satan, the father of lies, who from the
beginning fought with our parents in Eden' and who
hath in all generations inflicted injury upon our race
in many things-and he it is who hath sown bitter
tares among the chosen wheat of the congregations of
the Cross-saw that the monastery of the triumphant
man was adorned with every kind of virtue and that
its monks performed their duties and observed with
diligent care the stated seasons of prayer, and that
they completed with joy all the singing of the Psalms,
and the praise of Christ which was formed in the mouth
of those who daily went in and came out [of it], he
Genesis iii. 1-6.
We should have expected
for
"penitent"; see B. O., ii. p. 173, 1.4. The words
usually means
here =
"the visitors going and coming;" compare, text, p. 353,1.7.
<pb n="612"/>wished to make those ascetic brethren to cease from
service of the spirit, through the service of the table.
and to pour into and to fill their cells with the votive'
offerings of meat and drink of the will of Satan, and
[to occupy them] with services for the villagers of the
country round about and for people of all ranks in the
world whom he invited and brought to this poor mon-
astery, instead of the standing up in service before
God. And he worked upon a certain erring monk
who [belonged] to the corrupt confession of the follow-
ers of Severus of Antioch, 3 and he brought with him
some rancid oil, and he came to this monastery, forsooth,
* For see Bk. iv. chap. 7, supra, p. 390.
2 Thomas means to say that as the fame of the Abbot
Cyprian spread abroad in the countries round about people of
all ranks flocked to his monastery, and that they either made
offerings in money, or in kind, to it, or gave gratuities to the
monks to conduct services and prayers on their behalf. The
offerings in kind were eaten at a common table by monks and
visitors, and the gifts in money enabled them to indulge in
many of the comforts of life. In a short time the monks lost
their keen appreciation of the pleasures of the ascetic life and
grew to love the services of Saints' days and holidays, and
Satan was enabled to work his will upon them. At this time
the Abbot by means of a flask of bad oil, which was introduced
into the monastery by a heretic, showed them that this per-
petual and wearisome crowd of visitors was as injurious to
their spiritual life as was bad oil if used to anoint children and
sick people before baptism, and that the odour of such visits
was symbolically as the smell of bad oil; he caused the flask
of bad oil to be burned, and thus symbolically burned up the
disease which was eating away the spiritual life of the ascetics.
3 For see supra, p. 41, note 2.
* Literally, “oil of wickedness," which typified a wicked
spirit.
<pb n="613"/>
to pray. And he tarried here the night, and in the
morning he took out from his bosom a little horn of
that abominable oil, and gave it to the steward, saying,
"Keep this prayer' oil for me until I come back from
a journey which I must needs make"; now the brother
in his simplicity took the oil without asking any questions,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="353"/> and hid it in one of the windows of the monastery,"
until its owner should come and take it. And what
did Satan our adversary do? As long as that stinking
oil remained here, he stirred up [the people of] every
country and district to come and pray in the monastery
of Rabban Cyprian, and [they came] not only [from]
Margâ, which was near, but from Bêth Nûhděrán,³ and
· there came Arabs, and Ninevites, people of Adiabene,
and the people of Bêth Garmai, Bêth Běghâsh, Dâsen,
and the field of Hepton. And he caught and brought
hither such crowds upon crowds of people that the
monastery and the temple and the cells of the brethren
could not hold the multitudes that were going and
coming, and that belonged to the congregations which
established the will of Satan. And when Rabban, the
holy Mâr Cyprian, saw this thing which was not accord-
the oil with which children, atechumens and ܡܚܐ ܕܨܠܘܬܐ -
sick people were anointed before baptism; see Payne Smith,
Thes., col. 2240.
* I have usually translated 22 by "monastery", but it is
quite clear that a very large room or building destined for the
use of 15 in common is intended, where the monks had
their kitchen (Thomas of Margâ, text, p. 343, 1. 2) and place
for eating and sleeping (compare en las B. O., ii. p cxxxviii).
3 See Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 208–216.
* A province belonging to Môșul; see Hoffmann, Auszüge,
p. 233; Feige, Die Geschichte des Mâr 'Abhdîshô, p. 31 (trans-
lation); and supra, p. 397.
<pb n="614"/>ing to custom, he called to the brethren and said to
them, "O my sons, the tumult of all this changing
multitude is very foreign, in my opinion [to our
life] Who am I, and what is my righteousness, that
my fame hath stirred up all countries to weary us? Shew
me if ye have wrought any thing contrary to [our
rules], or if there is among you a man who hath as-
sociated himself with heretics and hath learned any
thing from them; for I know that God is not the cause
of all these assemblies." Then the brother who had
received the oil from the heretic came and fell down
before Rabban, and he answered and said to him,
"Master, forgive me, for I have committed sin un-
wittingly. A certain monk of the followers of Severus
of Antioch gave me this vessel of oil, and he said
to me, 'Keep it until I return from the journey which I
must make'; but what was the object of it I knew not."
And when Rabban saw it, he smelled from it the rancid
smell of the wicked, and he knew that it was the cause
of this damned weariness; and he commanded, and the
furnace was made hot, and he threw it into the fire
together with the vessel [that contained it]. Thus was
extinguished the flame of that spiritual sickness, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="354"/>
and those people who were on the roads turned back,
and those who were making preparations in their houses
to come left off making ready, and we received the
grace of God that the heretical doctrine of the Evil
One was corrected by the mediation of our holy father.
And a certain woman from Şâwrâ had a daughter
who was one day vexed by Satan, and she brought
* a vessel in the shape of an acorn; see Payne Smith,
Thes., col. 532.
<pb n="615"/>
her to this driver away of devils. And when she
had laid her at the feet of his holiness, he stood up and
prayed over her, and we were all looking on, and wasps'
vicious as those excited by smoke came forth from her
mouth, and thus our Lord speedily gave her healing;
and the woman took her daughter and went out from
before him confessing and glorifying God with us. But
why should we strive as if, forsooth, we were able to
relate [all] the wonders of this holy man? For who
knoweth the mighty deeds which he wrought in that
island, and in the deserts of Egypt and Scete, where
he lived for forty years? The things which he wrought
here he wrought secretly, and we have written down
a few of the many things which he did, [being] those
which were wrought before us, but we have omitted
[to notice] the rest because of their great number.
CHAPTER VII.
OF THE END OF THE COURSE OF THE BLESSED MAN, AND
OF HIS EXHORTATIONS TO HIS CHILDREN IN THE HOUR OF
HIS DEATH.
Let us now shew forth the crowning of the course
of this warrior, and how he who for sixty years had
not rested, either day or night, from his ardent course
towards his Lord, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="355"/> rested from the trouble of
his wandering in strange lands. Now after he had
.'bees ܗ ܕܘܟ̈ܚܬܐ wasps', but ܕܒܘܕܐ ' ܕܒܘܪ̈ܐ ܡܬܢܠܰܐCompare
Deuteronomy i. 44; and see Hoffmann, Syr. Arab. Glossen,
No. 3018, p. 107; Payne Smith, Thes., col. 814.
<pb n="616"/>completed twenty years of life here, and after he had
made his monastery to flourish with many brethren, and
with the books of the Holy Scriptures, and with readers
and ascetics, like the other monasteries of the holy men his
contemporaries, the day drew nigh and arrived in which
he should rest from his labour, and should finish his
contest in glorious perfectness. And he knew and felt
that the hour of his departure had arrived, and he
called to his holy sons, and spake to them, saying,
"Now, my sons, abide in peace, for my time is come,
and the moment of the end in which I shall go the
way of my fathers, and along the road of all the race
of Adam, hath drawn nigh. Take good heed, my sons,
to yourselves, and to all the doctrine which ye have
received from me; be not neglectful of the seasons of
prayer, nor of sitting [in meditation] in your cells, nor
of penitential bowings and prostrations to the ground
which I have committed to you, and in token of regret
for the worldliness of your lives, commanded you to
perform. Let not your lives pass away in idleness, for
the hour of death is hidden from us, and when it hath
come [to you] ye will repent of your days which [ye
have passed] in slothfulness. With all your might
take good heed that ye be not mingled with profane
heretics, and let your souls abominate all their doctrine,
for they are enemies of your manner of life, and of
your peace of mind, like Satan who is in them. My
sons, enter not into their monasteries, and mingle not
with the pure gold of your belief the abominable brass
of their subtilties; for they are cut off from belief, and
are empty of hope, and that their work is Satanic
the polluted oil which [we burned] a short time
ago [and which] gathered all countries against us, will
<pb n="617"/>
teach. Take heed moreover, my beloved, unto the love
of those who are in the world and exchange not the
love of your Lord <pb type="textAllignment"  n="356"/> for the love which ye once
denied before many. Possess neither gold, nor silver,
nor clothes more than ye need, that ye fall not, like
Gehazi, from the household of our Lord; for just as
our Lord is greater than Elisha, so also is the punishment
of those who tread His commandments under foot greater;
ye shall give answer to our Lord on the Day of Judgment
if ye transgress one of these commandments." And
when he had admonished and exhorted them, he com-
manded them and they came near before him, and he
kissed each one of them, and said farewell to them;
and all the brethren wept with a great weeping at the
parting of the righteous man from them. And when
he had saluted them, he bowed on the top of his staff,
like Jacob, and prayed, and he blessed the Church and
her children, and pastors, and masters, and kings, and
governors; and he made the sign of the holy Cross
over his monastery, and thus with his mouth full of the
glory of God, and his tongue [of] praise,³ he stretched
out his legs without sickness and without suffering, and
he opened his holy mouth and delivered up his spirit
in peace. And as he was gentle and gracious in his
life, and never chid any man or behaved harshly [to
him], so let him sleep happily until the Voice which
shall raise him up alive calleth him, and lifteth him
up to heaven with all his holy fellow-labourers. And
[the people of] all the village, together with the teachers,
12 Kings v. 22.
2 Hebrews xi. 21.
3 Psalm xxxv. 28; liv. 14; lxxi. 24.
iiii
<pb n="618"/>and scholars, and priests, and deacons were assem-
bled with the congregation of his sons, and they
celebrated the day of his commemoration with the
praises and canons according to custom, day and night,
and he was laid in the martyrium with the honour
which befitted his holiness; and on the following day
they kept a vigil for him a second time that he might
be an intercessor with his followers' for them on the
day when he shall be paid the wages of his trials and
troubles, and that they might sit down happily at the
feast of the kingdom above. Amen.
Now after the death of that holy chief our Lord
wrought a miracle at his grave, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="357"/> the [like of]
which had never been worked by him during his life,
that it might be known unto all men that he was alive
and with our Lord, and that now he was more near
to Him, and that he had obtained freedom of speech
before Him. A certain believing woman from the village
of Bêth Mârûth, who during the lifetime of Rabban
had had experience of the signs [which he worked],
had a son, who had been given to her by the prayer of
Rabban through a ḥěnânâ which she had received from
him; and this son contracted a serious disease, and it
waxed grievously sore in him. Now when his mother
understood that he was a dead man, for he was nigh
unto death, that believing woman, who is worthy of
being remembered for good, was, in her faith, like unto
the Shunammite' woman of Elisha, and she said to her
husband, "Rise up, and make ready a she-ass for me,
that it may go with my son to my Elisha, Mâr Cyprian,
companions, followers, train.
22 Kings iv. 24.
<pb n="619"/>
the ascetic, the spiritual father of my son". And although
every man advised her [saying], "Give up this idea,
for when the boy's body is shaken by the motion³ of
the ass, he will die immediately", she was not at all
persuaded, but said, "If he die there I will bury him,
and if he is made whole it will be the power of God
that, by the prayer of the holy man, shall bestow healing
upon my son". And having set herself and her son
upon the she-ass, she commanded her servant to lead
on quickly, and when she had come a distance of three
farsaḥ the soul of the lad departed from him. And
she alighted from the ass, and she bandaged (?)³ him,
and wrapped him round, being strong in her faith. And
she came to this monastery and went into the mar-
tyrium, and laid him before the grave of Rabban <pb type="textAllignment"  n="358"/>,
and she gave herself to prayer like the holy woman
Hannah, the mother of Samuel, and in a voice which
could be heard she spake mournfully, so that every one
round about her wept, saying, “O Mår Cyprian, the
servant of God, behold the loan which thou didst grant
to me during thy lifetime thou hast taken back in thy
death. I did not ask of thee a soulless corpse, neither
did I seek to suffer the pangs of childbirth, and to
bring up a child if all my care and lullabies were to be
in vain. Take pity upon that belief which hath taken
refuge in thee now that thou art dead as when thou
wast alive, and let not the bosom of thy woman disciple
.ܒܪܟܒܐ Read -
.
2 The exact meaning of is here is unknown both to Hoff-
mann and to myself.
3 I Samuel i. 11.
4 Read with BC and Vat. App.
<pb n="620"/>be deprived of the child which thou hast placed therein.
Entreat now thy Lord, like Elisha, and let Him give
back to me the blessing which I have plucked from
the tree of the house of Adam by thy prayer; and as
concerning Elisha also it is written that a dead man
came to life again [through touching] his dead body,"
even so let the breath of life blow into the son of thy
handmaid by the shrine of thy glorious body, for when
a servant is near unto his master he hath the greater
freedom of speech. Have pity upon the woman who
with lamentations goeth round about thy holy tomb,
and I will make it a condition with thy Lord that he
shall minister in thy monastery all the days of his life,
and that like Samuel the son of Hannah he shall be a
man set apart to the Lord, and shall be dedicated [to
God] all his days. O God of Mâr Cyprian, let the
request of thy handmaid enter in before Thee, although
I am unworthy [of it), and let Thy holy man Cyprian
be [my] advocate before Thee." Then God the merciful
One Who spake "Let light shine out of darkness", and
"Everything is possible to him that believeth",³ and
"Everything which ye shall ask in prayer, if ye believe,
ye shall receive", especially wishing to glorify the son
of His household in his death more than in his life,
made the soul of the boy to return to its body, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="359"/>
and he cried out according to [his] custom. Now we
were in the temple [occupied] in the service of Psalms
for the night, and the woman was in the martyrium;
and when the mother saw that [her] boy moved she
2 Kings xiii. 20. 21.
.3 .Genesis i יְהִי אוֹר וַיְהִי אוֹר :
3 St. Mark ix. 23.
4 St. Matthew xxi. 22.
<pb n="621"/>
glorified God with a loud voice, and by her voice we
perceived that the boy had come to life. And we also
went into the martyrium,' and saw him sitting before
his mother as in former times; and with the life which
Iwas restored to him he received a complete cure. And
every man praised God and marvelled, and the woman
took her son and went to her village, and related to
the believers everything which had taken place; and
because of this thing the praise of our Lord was pro-
claimed in all the country. And that believing woman,
like Hannah, performed her vow, and she set him apart
[to the Lord] even as she had vowed; and when the
boy had grown up and had arrived at years of dis-
cretion, she brought him to the monastery and left him
and went away. And he became a disciple and [after-
wards] an ascetic, and every year* she came to see him,
and brought to him clothes even as Hannah did for
Samuel. And he became a perfect example of a solitary
brother, and completed his life in this monastery ac-
cording to the will of God, the Lord of all, to Whom
be praise, and honour, and worship, and dominion, and
exaltation; and by the prayers of the holy Mâr Cyprian
may His grace and mercy [be] upon our assembly, now
and always, and for ever and ever, Amen.
Here endeth the history of the blessed Rabban Mâr
Cyprian, the priest and ascetic, the founder of the
holy monastery in the province of Birtâ.
* A kind of side-chapel by the side of the кórxn.
2
I Samuel ii. 19.
<pb n="622"/><pb type="textAllignment"  n="360"/>
CHAPTER VIII.
THE HISTORY OF THE WONDERFUL ACTS OF THE MIGHTY
MAN RABBAN GABRIEL, THE ASCETIC IN VERY TRUTH,
AND THE HEAD OF THE MONASTERY OF THE HOLY
MAR CYPRIAN.
.
THE AUTHOR'S APOLOGY TO THE READER.
Now therefore we have the intention of writing
concerning that marvellous man among the ascetics who
flourished in the later times, the blessed Rabban Gabriel,
the man who penetrated the mysteries of Christ, by
whose hands our Lord wrought the signs of the Prophets
and Apostles, and of weaving with my feeble speech
the crown of his strife, from the materials which have
been written down by early [writers] concerning his
noble acts, and from those things which I have heard
repeated about him, some by the monks who saw him
I whom I have met, and some from the priests and
believing men of the country. And I will lay it upon
the table of the hearing of those who love the histories
of holy men, adding also at the same time, according
to the materials which I have found with his history,
the narrative of the gentle-minded Rabban Paul, his
brother, whose memorial is among the righteous, upon
the help of whose prayers I rely. And as far as my
ignorance will allow I hope to bring conviction to my
hearers of the befitting rank' of the excellence of these
* I. e., Thomas hopes to be able to show in his narratives
of Gabriel and Paul that their acts and deeds were sufficiently
noble to justify him in placing them in the same book as the
glorious saints whose lives have been recorded in the earlier
chapters of this book.
<pb n="623"/>
divine men, and I entreat every one who is about to
read through these histories, not to consider me blame-
worthy as if I had drawn nigh presumptuously to set
down in writing their glorious deeds; for our Lord
knoweth that I have not drawn near to write down
their histories for the sake of profane advantages or
lying fame. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="361"/> For what profit can the ignorant
man who relieth upon his own wisdom inherit from
dull and senseless words? Or what benefit can the fool
gain, who although he cannot heal himself, is nevertheless
occupied with the praise of others? And I was seized
with jealousy that the congregation, and the place where
their bodies rest should not be deprived of the stories
of their holiness, for a paternal inheritance is beloved
by children, and the study of the histories of their lives
is a blessed thing for the heirs of the fathers. And,
moreover, it is not meet that the marvellous fame
of the mighty deeds of men, who in their holiness fall
short in no way of the early saints, should not be pro-
claimed and spoken of in the world. So then it be-
cometh the wise and understanding reader to drive out
all blame of my shortcomings from his mind, for just
as I have drawn near to set down in writing the
memorials [of holy men] for the benefit of the com-
munity, so also is it incumbent upon him to praise
and magnify these things which are written down. And
although [my] discourse be weak and halting, let him
have regard of the fruit which it beareth, and let him
gather roses from thorns, and flowers from brambles,
leaving the thorns and brambles behind in their com-
monness to become food for fire and pasturage for wild
animals.
<pb n="624"/>CHAPTER IX.
OF THE ORIGIN OF THESE HOLY MEN [RABBAN GABRIEL
AND RABBAN PAUL].
In the country of Bêth Garmai there was a village
called Luz, and in it there was a certain house of
believers renowned for [their] fear of God, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="362"/> among
whom was a believing man whose good works were
well attested. For this man our Lord prepared a good
wife, as it is written in Wisdom," "A good wife shall
be given to the man that feareth God because of his
good works", and he begot by her two sons; the name
of the one was Paul, and of the other Gabriel. And
while they were young children their father departed
from [this] temporary life to that of eternity, and his
true faith clave to him by the light of his works; and
the house remaining to their mother, this woman oc-
cupied herself in the reading of the Holy Scriptures
and in fasting and prayer, and she gave alms³ and
oblations abundantly to the poor and afflicted. Now
when the two boys had grown up and they had deter-
minedly set themselves apart to observe the things
which were seemly and which their Creator had placed
in the nature of the family of Adam, that believing
and holy woman took them, and gave herself to exile
for God's sake, holding on to the hands of her sons,
and relying upon the heavenly hope, and going along
the paths which [lead] towards this land. When God,
Who knoweth every thing before it cometh to pass,
A village situated on the Zâb; see Hoffmann, Auszüge,
p. 277.
Proverbs xviii. 22.
ܘܒܡܘܗܒܬܐ Read 3
<pb n="625"/>
Isaw the love of that believing woman, and that her
sons were about to become sons of His kingdom, for
she had despised everything in her love for Him, He
drew her with her sons to this province of Birtâ, to a
hamlet called Şâwrâ' where there was a famous school with
enlightened teachers-for that school was still in exis-
tence through [the support] of other believing men who
feared God, and who carefully provided for the assemblies
of scholars, and for the teachers who loved learning.
And when this woman had gone into this part of the
country, and saw that the believing men who lived
there were well attested in the Christian belief, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="363"/>
she elected to live in this village, and she entrusted
her two beloved sons, Paul and Gabriel, to the school
there. And she trained and taught them by works of
the perfect life and admonished and counselled them
by day and by night to despise and reject all the
possessions of this fleeting world, to such a degree that
she allowed them to draw nigh to no manner of service,
the labour of learning alone excepted. And they remained
in that holy school for fifteen years until they were trained
in all the doctrine of Divine things, and in the theoreti-
cal knowledge of the Scriptures and the understanding
and interpretation of them, moreover, they were frequent
in the actual practice of fasting, and prayer, and night vigils
[which they kept] with their mother, the woman worthy
of mention for good; for she would not separate nor
depart from them, and she lived in a chamber in the
school, and like Hannah the daughter of Penuel," she
This school was founded by the famous Bâbhai; see supra,
p. 296.
21 Samuel i. 12.
kkkk
<pb n="626"/>persevered with them in standing up in prayer in the
temple, and in the vigils of holy festivals, and of first
days of the week. And when they had been fully in-
structed, and needed nothing more from the school-
for in the fifteen years they had acquired all ecclesiasti-
cal learning-that blessed old woman counselled them
to renounce henceforth every material thing' of [this]
world, and to draw nigh to the ascetic life.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="364"/>
CHAPTER X.
OF THE DISCIPLESHIP OF THE BLESSED PAUL AND GABRIEL
IN THE MONASTERY OF RABBAN CYPRIAN.
Now at that time the congregation of Rabban
Cyprian was famous among perfect, upright and holy
men, with whom there still existed the sweet smell of
the sweat of the labours of that holy man, and by the
I will of God, and their own freewill choice, and the
desire of their mother they elected to draw nigh to
the ascetic life in this monastery. And when they two
had entered there, and had asked to be received by
the old men, and were numbered among the brother-
hood, they completed three full years in the service
of the community in the ready obedience [which is]
acceptable unto God, having careful regard always
for the nursing and attendance upon strangers, and
[performing] all manner of service for the community;
and they became a fair mirror to all the brethren who
1
literally, 'that which belongėth to matter from
Son or Dow, Uŋ.
<pb n="627"/>
were in the monastery, and to the strangers who
used to come to them. Now Paul was of a zealous
nature and somewhat quick-tempered, but the divine
man Gabriel was gentle and mild, and he was
a man in whom the love of Christ dwelt, and by
reason of his gracious disposition he was called Sabha'
by all the brotherhood. What peaceful disposition ever
existed which could be compared unto his? What wise
man ever possessed the ready disposition [to receive]
all men like unto him? For those who had never seen
him distinguished and recognized him at once from the
report of his characteristic qualities, the venerable ap-
pearance, the gentle word,³ the measured step, the
bent head with his gaze fixed upon the ground, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="365"/>
and his stooping position, when meditating upon the
Holy Scriptures at such times as he was free from the
service of the monastery. And the two [young men]
performed the work of the monastery thoroughly and
with great discretion, without which no man is able to
live perfectly the ascetic life, for they went forth into
the outer cells of the monastery when all the other
monks were celebrating the vigil of a festival, and
remained by themselves. Now the excellent Paul re-
ceived and ministered unto strangers, and he chose
this manner of life that he might afford relief and
do honour unto all men, to the poor and afflicted, the
troubled and the sick, for he had experience in healing
2
I. e., "old man".
qualities of the mind and character; see text, pp. 292,
1. 4, 325, 1. II.
.ܡܠܐ Read 3
* Read, with C, Sor.
5 Read, with C,
<pb n="628"/>the body; and he established the old woman his mother
in a chamber near his cell, and thus toiling and labour-
ing in acts of holiness, like the venerable and holy
women [of old] and with a good³ name and a crown
of praise, she departed to our Lord in sweet peace;
and glorious happiness is prepared for her on the day
of His coming. Now the blessed Gabriel chose to
dwell in the cell of the monk and to lead the life of
an anchorite; and while Paul, like the blessed Abraham,
took care by his labour and service to become one
who received the poor, Gabriel, like the mighty prophet
Elijah, honoured the life of the solitary.
* Read
* With the form op Arab. 5, compare, Arab.
5. Mount Kardô is, according to tradition, the spot upon
which the ark rested and where it was swallowed up by the
earth. According to a story told in the history of Mâr Awgîn,
a certain Mâr Jacob made up his mind to go to the mountains
of Kardo, and to pray to the Lord to show him the ark and
to bring back a plank therefrom. Having taken the advice of
Mår Awgîn he set out for Ķardô, and upon his arrival at the
skirts of the mountain an angel met him and led him to the
spot where the ark had been swallowed up. The Lord then
appeared to him and told him that he had arrived at the place
wherein the ark was laid, and when Mâr Jacob had asked Him
to give him a plank therefrom, He caused a plank of the wood
of the ark to be set before him. Mâr Jacob received it with
joy and returned to Mâr Awgîn who straightway made from
it a cross which he wore upon his neck, and which he after-
wards buried in his monastery. See Bedjan, Acta Martyrum,
tom. i Paris, 1892, pp. 435-437.
<pb n="629"/>
CHAPTER XI.
OF THE DEPARTURE OF RABBAN GABRIEL TO THE COUNTRY
OF KARDO TO LEAD THE LIFE OF AN ANCHORITE, AND OF
HOW HE CAME BACK AGAIN TO THIS COUNTRY.
Now when [Rabban Gabriel] had been in this mon-
astery a long time labouring and excelling <pb type="textAllignment"  n="366"/> in all the
various acts of the life of ascetics, in fasting, and in
prayer, in nightly vigils, and sighing and weeping be-
tween the times [of prayer].' happiness was ascribed to
him by all the brotherhood. But when that man, [who
was] wise in matters relating to God, saw the honour
which was offered to him by all the brotherhood, and
that happiness was ascribed to him by every man, he
despised and rejected everything, his cell, and the
things which were necessary for his use, and every-
thing which he possessed in the monastery, and taking
with him the holy Book of the Gospels [wrapped up]
in a small cloak, he went out secretly by night, without
any one knowing [of his departure]. And because he
had decided to become an anchorite and to live remote
from any human habitation, and to make himself a
stranger to all those who knew him, he directed the
course of his journey to the mountains of Ķardó, and
he made himself a dwelling and a place of rest far
away from any spot where he was likely to meet a
human being, in a hollow which he lighted upon in
a thickly wooded glen in a mountain side, for asceticism
and voluntary abstinence became his dwelling-place,
I. e., between the services.
<pb n="630"/>which was remote from every human consolation, and
he never saw a man, and never approached either a
habitation or a peaceful and inhabited place during the
whole time that he lived there. His food [consisted]
of the roots and the fruit with which the Divine Grace
kept his life [in him]. What temptation of devils [is
there] which did not pass over him there? And what
pains [are there] which mortal nature knoweth [how]
to bring upon the child of man, which did not come
upon the holy man? Those who have lived the life
of the anchorite and have tasted its troubles will know
the taste of these bitternesses. Now he held conver-
sations with the wild animals, for they came to him
constantly. And just as [they stood] before the blessed
Noah at the door of the ark, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="367"/> even so also did
they stand tranquilly before him-now a wild animal
[usually] departeth, and fleeth and shyly runneth away
at the sight and approach of a human being-and although
they were [usually] afraid of the cage (?) yet they fed
and made their homes near him, as if they had taken
refuge and shelter in him.
Now the blessed Paul his brother ceased not to
weep by reason of the remoteness of the venerable
Gabriel, but by day and by night he and the brethren
prayed with supplication and beseeching, and entreated
God to make known to them what had become of the
holy man and where he dwelt; and after a long time,
because the blessed Rabban Gabriel became well known
to all the people who were in Ķardo, for our Lord
áni
does not make sense here and the word must be
corrupt. Hoffmann suggests that we should either read
"cage", or
"hunting".
<pb n="631"/>
had given healing and great cures by his hand unto
many, his fame also reached the wonderful Paul his
brother. And having taken a letter of entreaty from
the congregation of the brethren who were in this
monastery, he rose up and set out to bring him, and
he made inquiries about him, and sought [him] out,
and it was shewn to him where he dwelt; and when
he came up to him, they fell upon each other's neck
and wept like loving brothers. And the venerable
Paul brought out the letter of the congregation
and gave [it] to him, and when he had read it, he
did not give his brother a decided answer whether
he would go or whether he would not, but he gave
the matter to God; and they both stood up the whole
night in prayer, [entreating] that the Lord would make
known His will unto them. And on the third night
when Paul was sleeping through the fatigue of the
vigil, the angel of the Lord appeared to Abbâ Gabriel,
face to face, and counselled him to set out with his
brother, [saying,] "This is the will of the Lord, for
thou art set to be a great benefit to that country;"
and on the morrow he rose up and came with his
brother, while Paul rejoiced, and was glad, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="368"/>
and praised God at the return of the holy man his
brother. Thus by the power of Christ our Lord which
clave to them they came to this country.
<pb n="632"/>CHAPTER XII.
OF THE BLESSED MAR JOHN, AND OF HIS CONGREGATION
IN THE HOLY MONASTERY OF NERABH BARZAL"
Now inasmuch as I promised above,³ in the history
of Rabban Cyprian, when I repeated the names of the
holy men who lived in this country, and counted among
them the holy John who lived in Nêrabh Barzai (for
to this [monastery] came Rabban Gabriel when he
returned from Kardô, and dwelt therein a long time),
to relate the history of this place, it is [now] time for
me to do so. This mountain glen (nêrēbhâ) had a
place of ascent on one of its lower sides, but on [all]
the others it was fortified from the most remote gene-
rations and times of old, when each country had a
chief, and when each chief was held to be a petty
king in his country; but each was afraid of the others
* The meaning of
in Auszüge, p. 225.
Assyrian
has been pointed out by Hoffmann,
With the word we may compare the
niribi, plur. -
niribiti;
see Lotz, Die Inschriften Tiglathpileser's I, Leipzig, 1880,
p. 143.
2 mà sắn i. c., "the glen of Barzai." Barzai, sometimes
written Barzi, seems to be derived from Bar: (for Burz) "high",
and a second word; the form, 59) Barzôe also seems
to exist. It is possible also that Barzai may be connected with
the Persian Barâz "wild boar", a beast which in early times
was much prized by the Persians; compare Βαράζης, Οὐαράζης,
Bpáns, Nöldeke, Geschichte der Perser, p. 240, note 1.
3 See supra, p. 577.
4 It is clear from this passage that is a mountain glen
or valley with only one place of entrance.
5 diminutive from
see Payne Smith, Thes.,
col. 2143.
<pb n="633"/>
and considered them to be raiders and robbers. And
therefore in many places in the mountains, and rocks,
and crags thou mayest find fortresses, and castles, and
strong cities fenced about with walls, which were built
and fortified by the ancients. In this country,' ac-
cording to what is said, there lived a mighty man
called Barzai, and he fortified this mountain glen and
dug in it great cisterns, that is to say, pits to hold
water, and he built caves hewn out of the rock [in it],
and it was called Nêrabh Barzai, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="369"/> after the
name of that ruler who furnished the fortress and made
it a habitable place from the beginning.
Now when the Gospel of our Lord and Redeemer
Jesus Christ had flown abroad, and heathen doctrine
and the worship of idols had ceased from the world,
all the furrows of the world ascribed praise to the
wise Creator by the mouths of the holy men who were
in it, and the mountains also ascribed praise to God
through the ascetics and anchorites who dwelt in them,
according to the word of Isaiah' the prophet, "Those
who dwell in the rocks shall give praise, and from the
top of the mountains shall they cry out." To this
mountain glen then, with other [ascetics] from the ter-
ritory of the Byzantine Greeks, came the blessed Mar
John, the Metropolitan, the companion and colleague
of the seven Bishops who dwelt together all their lives in
the holy Monastery of Rishâ, and this holy Mâr John
* Extracts from this chapter are quoted in B. O., iii. I.
p. 499, coll. 1, 2.
* All the MSS. have, but we must read "furrows";
compare Job xxxi. 38; Psalm lxv. 10.
.ܪܒܓܘܗ Read 3
4 Isaiah xlii. 11.
1111
<pb n="634"/>established there a congregation of anchorites; and he
himself dwelt among them in a [cave like unto a] grave
without light and without intercourse with his fellow-
man, except on rare occasions, and sometimes he went
to participate in the Holy Mysteries. All [those] men
were perfect and divine men, as the cave in which
their bodies were laid testifieth, and their names are
written in the Book of Life; and behold if thou readest
above their coffins thou wilt find their names written
over the places where they are buried, but some of
them are known to have been erased through the long
interval of time. Now the congregation of that place
was preserved and continued until the time of the
holy Rabban Gabriel, and in the days when he came
from Kardô there were forty men in that holy Monastery
of Rabban Mår John. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="370"/> And this Mâr John taught
the inhabitants of the village of Kôph,³ and this village
before his time never accepted the teaching of Christi-
anity, but was mad* and drunk with the worship of
idols and of trees and other things. When Mâr John
received the Divine revelation concerning the teaching
of that village, that divine man rose up and came
forth from the place in which he had shut himself up,³
and went down to the village of Kôph, and the Magians
and Manicheans and heathen who dwelt therein were
Hoffmann
* Compare Philippians iv. 3; Revelation xiii. 8.
thinks that "Book of Life" may refer to the ecclesiastical dip-
tychs; compare B. O., ii. p. 202, col. 2.
ܪܬܝܟܝܢ Read -
3 See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 225.
4 Assemânî has no ; see B. O., iii. 1. p. 499, col. 2, l. 21.
5 Mar John was a 1.5 or "recluse."
6 See supra, p. 481.
<pb n="635"/>
gathered together to hear his discourse and to listen
to what he had to say to them; for they knew of the
virtue and righteousness of the man, and they had also
heard of the mighty deeds and signs which he wrought
in the name of Christ. And when, according to the
words of the blessed Paul, "Those who believe will
not ask for signs, but only those who do not believe","
they asked him to shew them the greatness of his
doctrine and belief which [arose] from [the signs], he
manifested mightily to them his great works. He
brought to life again a man who had been dead three
days, and they marvelled; and again he withered by
a curse only a large, tall olive tree, to the worship of
which Satan had led them on by reason of the beauty
and splendour of its growth, the abundance of its fruit,
and the density of its foliage. He mocked at fire, for
he used to go and sit in it, like Ananias' and his
companions, and was in no wise injured; the sun which
was held to be a god by those who worshipped it,
he turned back by his command; he adjured a fountain
of water and stopped it from flowing, and again he
gave the permission, and the water came forth; and
the blessed John greatly moved and terrified the in-
habitants of Ķôph by the power of his signs. And
when those people saw that the power of God was
manifested by his command, not only upon creatures
and things, but also upon physical bodies which were
accounted gods by them, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="371"/> they bowed the
shoulders of their free-will to take upon them the yoke
of the chariot of the Cross. And he brought them
Compare 1 Corinthians xiv. 22.
See The Song of the Three Holy Children, v. 66.
<pb n="636"/>nigh to holy baptism, he made them partakers in the
happiness of the propitiating Mysteries, he pulled down
the fire-temple and built them the church which still
standeth [there], he brought a teacher for them, he
established schools there, and he sanctified it and
purified it. From being a field of tares and a shrine
of the Calumniator, it hath become this day the field
of Christ, and the abiding place for His will, and [its
inhabitants] make a boast in the name of the holy
Mår John, as people who by his hands were converted
to the worship of God the Maker of heaven and earth.
CHAPTER XIII.
OF THE COMING OF RABBAN GABRIEL TO THE MONASTERY
OF NERABH BARZAI, OF THE HEADSHIP WHICH HE ACCEPTED,
AND OF THE DEATH OF PAUL HIS BROTHER.
Now when the congregation of this Monastery of
Nêrabh Barzai heard that the blessed Rabban Gabriel
had drawn nigh to their border, since the head who
had been appointed over them was dead, they went.
out to meet him with great honour and ceremony, and
they led him to their monastery. And when he had
tarried with them a few days, they and the believing
men of the place prevailed over him with their entrea-
ties, and he unwillingly accepted the headship of that
holy monastery; and he did not wish to dwell with
them [in the monastery] below, but in the cell of the
holy Mâr John in the place where he was wont to shut
* Read
<pb n="637"/>
himself up. And he lived there for many years, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="372"/>
even until he reached the limit of his old age, minister-
ing in the service of angels, and profiting and making
[others] profit, and leading [others], and being led him-
self. And he was watchful to guard himself and the
brotherhood which had been entrusted to him, and he
was never once negligent in [making] intercession and
prostrations in prayer, and in [performing] labours, and in
continuing in his strenuous career by day and by night.
Now Rabban Paul his brother lived in the Monas-
tery of Rabban Cyprian, and after a few days the head
of that monastery departed [this] temporary life to that
of eternity, and by the election of the brethren and by
the wish of the believing men [Divine] Grace marked
Paul out to be the head and governor of the brethren.
And when he had accepted this work he went down.
to the country of Bêth Garmai, and sold his village
Lûz, for as much as anyone would give him, disputing
nothing, and he removed and built in this place the
temple which had been built some time ago, in the
days of Rabban Cyprian, because it was well nigh
crumbling into ruins and falling down by reason of its
great age. And he also built and furnished the Mon-
astery of the holy Mår John, where his brother Rabban
Gabriel was the head, and whatever [money] was left
over he gave and distributed among the poor and
needy (may his alms be laid up in heaven!), caring for
himself nothing at all, but only that he might give food
to the orphans, and the afflicted, and the distressed,
and the beggars who came to him. He was kind and
gracious to the orphans, he fed the widows, and in
his monastery the table was at all times laid ready
with good, substantial food as much for the stranger
<pb n="638"/>who came there, as for the brethren whom he had
appointed therein. He ministered unto the sick, he
visited the prisoners, he clothed the naked, he filled
the hungry with food, he gave the thirsty to drink,
he visited continually the prisoners who were confined
in the gaol of Shukâ-dhe-ḥadh-bhe-Shabbâ' for [non-
payment of taxes, he himself carrying in his own hands
food for them, and whatever they were in need of,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="373"/> clothing for the naked, and fruits (?) 3 for the
sick who were among them. But how many [more]
times shall we repeat the glorious things of this strenuous
labourer who took upon himself the burden of every
man? In that day shall our Lord cause him to hear
the joyful sound, "I was hungry and thou gavest me
to eat, I was thirsty and thou gavest me to drink, I
was naked and thou didst clothe me, I was sick and
thou didst visit me, I was in prison and thou didst
come unto me; enter thou into the joy of thy Lord."
And it came to pass that he went into the city
according to his habit of anxious care [for others] to
bring back clothes for the ascetics and strangers, and
he fell ill there of the severe attack of sickness through
• I. e.,
the "Sunday-market,” or “Sunday-bazaar".
For the names "Tuesday-market" and "Wednesday-market"
and of places beginning with 5, see Yakut, tom. vi. p. 123;
and De Goeje, Bibl. Geographorum Arabicorum, tom. vi.
p. 194, 1. 8.
* All the MSS. have. This may be a mistake for
(Payne Smith, Thes., col. 2002), or a form derived from
"fruit" (Payne Smith, Thes., col. 2185), or it may be
connected with the ✓ (as and so mean “comforts", or dainty,
appetising foods."
3 St. Matthew xxv. 21, 35, 36.
<pb n="639"/>
which he departed from [this world]. And the brethren
who were with him carried him upon an animal and
brought him to the monastery, and [his] illness became
more severe, and thus being soaked with the sweat
of his labours, and his feet worn and broken through
[his] travelling in the paths of holy men, he exchanged
[this] life which passeth away for that of heaven, and
he became the heir of the saints. Then the brethren
and the people of all the country were pained at the
death of the holy man, and all the brethren from the
monasteries round about were gathered together, and
they bore his holy body with honour and laid it on the
west [side] of the martyrium towards the north by
the command of Rabban Gabriel, [who] solemnly ad-
jured and forbade that any tomb-stone or monument
whatever should be built above his grave, for he looked
upon humility as his monument; may our Lord by his
prayers give help and redemption to those who care
for this holy house, Amen!
Now when a certain believer whose name was
Malbadh, who belonged to a noble family, saw that
Rabban Paul had built this monastery and finished it,
and had obtained a great and fair renown thereby,
he was smitten with envy, and he presumed to set
himself in opposition to these holy men, and wasted
much money uselessly, and built a so-called monastery*
near Şâwrâ. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="374"/> And he filled it with fine buildings,
and provided it with cells, and he invited [thither]
ascetics, promising [them] that he would care for them
in everything; but he did not know that a monastery
.ܡܥܪ̈ܒܝܗ Read '
2 Read, with BC, was? Sax.
<pb n="640"/>for ascetics must be built by holy ascetics and virgins
[themselves], and not by wealthy denizens of the world.
And Rabban Gabriel, who was in the habit of enjoying
Divine revelations, made a mock of that building, saying,
"Behold, as it is written in Ezekiel, it is founded, but
it shall not prosper;" and in a short time that house
began to be deserted, and the two or three ascetics
who dwelt therein were scattered, and it remained
in its miserable' condition as it is apparent to all men.
CHAPTER XIV.
OF THE HEADSHIP OF THE MONASTERY OF RABBAN CYPRIAN
WHICH RABBAN GABRIEL RECEIVED, AND OF HIS WATCHFUL
REGARD FOR EVERY DUTY.
Now after the departure of Rabban Paul of holy
memory to [his] everlasting home, this monastery
began to be in want and to become poor; for their
divine protector Paul had already left them, and the
monks also began to depart. And the people of this
country together with these brethren were gathered
together, and they went to Rabban Gabriel in the
Monastery of Mår John of Nêrabh Barzai, and shewed
him that this monastery would certainly fall into decay
if it was deprived of his protection. And they said to
him, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="375"/> "All the brethren are going away, and
this holy place which thou hast toiled to build up is
becoming deserted." And the blessed man answered
Ezekiel xvii. 10. Correct the reference at the foot of the
Syriac text.
2 Literally, "common state".
<pb n="641"/>
pray to
and said to them, "I am unable to go to [any] place
without the Divine command which permitted me to
return from Kardo, and which gave me rest in this
holy place; but return all of you, each man to his
house, and this night I and these brethren will
our Lord, and that which is best He will do for us".
And in the evening at the general service of prayer
he commanded the brethren to pray concerning the
matter, and he himself went up to the cell of Abba
John, and offered up prayer to God the whole night.
And towards the morning when his wakefulness rested,
his mind was carried away, and it was as if he were in
the martyrium of Rabban Cyprian. And Rabban Cyprian
himself was alive and singing this psalm' by himself,
"How good, and how pleasant [it is] for brethren when
they dwell together", and it seemed as if Rabban Cyprian
were asking him to sing the verses of this psalm in turn
with him. And when he had said the last verse, "For
there the Lord commanded blessing and life for ever-
more", he woke up and came to himself glad and
rejoicing, and he knew that the vision was from the
Lord, and that he had received permission to depart
from there to the dwelling of [Rabban Cyprian]'s mon-
astery where his marvellous brother Paul had ended his
life. And in the morning he went down to the mon-
astery and appointed a guardian in his stead, and prom-
ising that he would never forget them, he and the
brethren of the monastery came down hither. And he
began the work of relieving the poor and the brethren
of the monastery like unto his brother, but he helped
them more than he did, and he manifested the greatest
Psalm cxxxiii. 1-3.
mmmm
<pb n="642"/>care [for them], for our Lord had given him the
gift of dominion over devils, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="376"/> and he healed
every wound and sickness by the might of the Cross;
and revelations were shewn to him by God, and he
could look into and see things that were afar off like
things that were near. He bore the Cross of his Master
with glorious fervour, and he clave to the reproach of
the Cross; and as he had laboured in the vineyard of
his Master the whole day, and had borne the burden
and the heat without shewing slackness in his spiritual
traffic, his Master honoured him, as with a pledge' by
the mighty deeds and wonders which He wrought by
his hands, and by the glorious revelations which He
made him enjoy, until the day for which he waited
should come when He would call him, and set him at
His right hand, as a guest of the company of Antonius,*
and Macarius,' and Arsenius,* and all the righteous men
of his calling and manner of life. For after the manner
of the Prophets and like unto the Apostles he wrought
healings and wonders in this monastery, and on account
of this, many ascetics were gathered together here.
And every one who flagged, or was lax in carrying
out the works of the ascetic life, became young again,
and his strength was renewed for the labours of the
monastic life when he saw this holy old man. And
he constantly admonished the brethren who persistently
carried out the work to which they had been called,
saying, "My beloved, it is but a little time that we
1 ; see also Syr. text, p. 220, l. 8.
See supra, p. 30.
3 See supra, p. 51, note 4.
* See supra, p. 29, note 4.
<pb n="643"/>
can serve our Lord in this life, and [then] we pass
away, but the reward for our small service is laid up
for us [for] a space of time which is not diminished
by the course and revolutions of times and seasons.
Consider, my beloved, how many troubles and trials the
holy Prophets bore, and how many afflictions and tortures
the blessed Apostles endured, and the sufferings and
bitter deaths which the victorious martyrs suffered for
the sake of the kingdom of heaven! Consider the
ascetic fathers how they forsook the world and its
possessions, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="377"/> and [how] they forgot the love of
parents and brethren, and how they went forth naked
into the wilderness to live by themselves for the love
of our Lord Who said to them, "Whosoever will not
forsake parents, and brethren, and sons, and daughters,
and everything, and hate himself, and take up his cross",
- that is to say troubles, and trials, and bitterness-
"and endure for My sake everything which shall afflict
[him], and deny himself the things that are visible, is
not able to be my disciple." Let us not then, beloved,
be readers of the glorious deeds of holy men without
carrying out in ourselves their course of life, for God,
the Lord of all, reproacheth the man who readeth but
doeth not, by the hand of David,' thus, "What hast
thou to do with the books³ of My commandments?
Thou hast taken My covenant in thy mouth, but thou
hast hated my instruction, and thou hast cast My words
behind thee." And again the divine Paul writeth in
his beloved epistles," "Those who know³ the law are
St. Luke xiv. 26, 27.
.ܘܠܟܬܢ̈ܐ The Péshitta has 3
.ܫܡܘܥܘܗܝ The Pèshitta has 5
2 Psalm 1. 16, 17.
4 Romans ii. 13.
<pb n="644"/>not. [accounted] righteous before God, but those who
do the law are justified". Let us not put our trust upon
the tunic, and the black cloak, and the tonsure, and
the garb with which we are clothed, as if these were
anything at all before God. For there are in the
world poor people who do not possess even these
things, but are naked and in want, and are afflicted
and needy, and have not even the bread of the day,
yet God doth not shew compassion on them for the
the sake of their being in want, because poverty is their
business in life. And although ye fast and pray, and
watch, and work, still all the labour of all the days of
your lives is not worthy to be compared with the gift
of food with which God sustaineth you in this life;
give up, then, expecting to be rewarded for it with a
reward in the world which is to come. For the happiness
of that world is not given for the sake of labours, but
is bestowed upon holy men by Divine Grace, for the
wages which are laid up there are in proportion to
the righteousness of God, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="378"/> and the [merits of
the] labours of holy men are completely put out of
sight by the Grace of God. So then, my beloved, let
us not imagine that the little work which we do [here]
can justify us before God, but let us be the more filled
with fear lest our parents and our brethren who are
involved in earthly affairs, and who give tribute, whose
heads are bowed under the payment of imperial taxes,
who relieve the afflicted and shew compassion upon
the needy, and who imagine that we are righteous,
may be found there before our Lord to be better than
we are; for it is written, "Blessed is he that giveth
more than he that receiveth." Let us not then destroy
Acts xx. 35-
<pb n="645"/>
that blessing by eating the labour of believing men,
and by doing nothing which is worth our food; for
the hireling who laboureth honestly before his com-
panion keepeth [his] covenant with his master who
hath hired him; and if in the presence of a man like
unto himself he is careful not to eat the bread of his
labour without fatigue, how much more is it meet for
us to live upon the bread of our Lord with tears, and
not to neglect for one moment the service and labour
which our holy garb demandeth. My brethren, let us
remember that unchangeable kingdom, and that never-
ending feast and that everlasting' light in which the
saints revel with delight. And let us earnestly desire
that brotherhood which is never attacked by envy,"
and that undisturbed³ concord, and that unbroken un-
animity, and that insatiable' love by which the hearts
of the righteous are filled at the sight of the adorable
splendour of Christ. And [let us remember] that as-
sembly of the Church gathered together from spiritual
and corporeal beings which is never to be dispersed;
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="379"/> and that unchangeable happiness of the sounds
of the songs of joy of those who sing; and that humility
which can never be puffed up; and that inheritance
which can never be spoiled, which the righteous inherit
2
wanting in Payne Smith's Thes.
wanting in Payne Smith's Thes.
3, a rare form.
, wanting in Payne Smith's Thes.
5, a rare form.
6
7
8
wanting in Payne Smith's Thes.
a rare form.
a rare form.
<pb n="646"/>in the world of light; and the incomparable glory with
which the children of light there are clothed; and the
gift which can never be stolen away," which the blessed
inherit in the new world of Christ; and that praise
which can never be silenced, 3 which is loudly pro-
claimed by all rational beings. And if the vigilant
understanding of your souls be occupied in meditation
upon these and such-like things, O my venerable brethren,
ye will find the power and be able to tread down and
to hold in contempt the foul passions which are stirred
up within you by reason of the wretchedness and
earthiness of the body with which ye are clothed, and
by the erring nature of the changeable soul which is
in you; and ye shall be worthy of the Grace which is
the bestower of all gifts, so that ye may live out your
days in peace which is free from all strivings, accord-
ing to the Will of your Creator. And ye shall become
in this world holy temples in which the praises of the
Lord are sung; and ye shall be glorious tabernacles
in which the songs of glory and redemption are heard;
and ye shall become like luminaries [shining] in the
darkness, whose good works [men] shall see and shall
glorify your Father Who is in heaven; and ye shall
be crowned with the glory which is laid up for all the
righteous who have been and who shall be." And
with these and such-like words did that holy mouth
preach and make to listen the ears of the flock which
had been entrusted to him. And they became like
wanting in Payne Smith's Thes.
I
2
Ng, a rare form.
3 a rare form.
wanting in Payne Smith's Thes.
<pb n="647"/>
unto good seed sown in a cultivated field of good
ground, and the furrows of the souls of his disciples
brought forth fruit; and the holy children of his fatherly
[rule] became well known and esteemed, and every day
and always the sons of this congregation, [which was
under] <pb type="textAllignment"  n="380"/> the direction of this good and famous
labourer in the sanctuary, the all-wise and holy Rabban
Gabriel, became the occasion of praise of their Lord.
CHAPTER XV.
OF THOSE ASCETICS AND HOLY MEN WHO WERE TO BE
FOUND IN VARIOUS PLACES IN THE DAYS OF RABBAN
GABRIEL.
Now in the days of Rabban [Gabriel] many ascetics
were to be found, some of whom were solitary brethren
who lived in a monastery, and some were Bishops and
Metropolitans, of whom we have made mention in
this history that we might be blessed through record-
ing their names; and we will shew forth concerning
Rabban Gabriel who was well known and famous among
them.
In the holy monastery of Beth 'Abhe there lived a
holy ascetic whose name was Abbâ Dômat (Domitius),
and he was a righteous and famous man by whose
hands Christ our Lord wrought many mighty deeds.
And the rags from his garments drove away the devils
openly as did those from the clothes of Paul;* now as
he also came from the country of Bêth Garmai he had
great affection for Rabban Gabriel.
1 Acts xix. 12.
<pb n="648"/>In the Monastery of Bêth Rabban bar-Idtå' there
lived a holy man who was called Isho-sabhran bar-
Mâmai, a good and self-denying man, and sicknesses
were driven away by the maṣṭaba³ upon which he
rested himself; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="381"/> he was finally appointed
Bishop of the great city of Nineveh (Môșul). This man
restored the temple of that monastery, and removed it
from its site, as did Rabban Paul in this monastery.
In a mountain glen called Bêth Gazzâ there dwelt
the marvellous ascetics Khômînâ* and Ma'nå, [who were]"
aged solitaries, and who wrought many mighty deeds,
for they were many times seen by believers to cross
over on the top of the Great Zâb river.
The holy Abbâ Pethion lived a glorious life of
asceticism by himself in a cell [situated] in a mountain
glen called Şaphi. He was a good and self-denying
* See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 181.
2 Dr. Jensen of Marburg has been so kind as to call my
attention to Rawlinson, Cuneiform Inscriptions of Western Asia,
vol. ii. plates 51, L. 53a, and 55, 1. 41a; and vol. iii. pl. 67,
1. 14d, from which it appears that Mami is the name of Bêlit
ilâni, "the mistress of the gods."
37. C., Líbias, (Duval, Lexicon, col. 1139;
note 5); Compare Gr. σTißác. This word also occurs in B. O., I.
p. 427, col. 2, last line, and the plur. 15 is probably to be
found in the Chronicle of Joshua the Stylite, ed. Wright, p. 23,
1. 21 (ed. Martin p. 22, 1. 6); see also Hoffmann, Syr. Arab.
Glossen, No. 6503, p. 251; and Nöldeke, Bibliographische An-
zeigen, in Z. D. M. G., Band xxx. p. 355, at the top.
* This name is probably Persian, and Hoffmann thinks it
خمانی .eduavis); compare fem) خُومَيْنا may be the same as
همينيا and همانيا from whence we have the name of the place
(Yakut, tom. iv. p. 992).
5, Gr. Maiávvas; see Payne Smith, Thes., col 2186.
<pb n="649"/>
man, and was seen by men but rarely; devils and
sicknesses fled away from the bread which had been
blessed and given [to people] by him. He departed
this temporary life there, and his body was removed
to a village called Rishâ.
Abbâ Ḥabhîbhâ and Jacob his brother shone with
the light of virtue in the mountain of Yânân; they made
whole those who were sick of the palsy, they gave
barren women children, they forbade the locusts to in-
jure the vines, and everything was obedient to their
command.
In the Monastery of Beth Kôkâ' there lived-famous
for holiness-Abba Sabhr-Isho, surnamed Khephîphâ
(2. e., Humpback), who was a truly ascetic monk, and also
Abbá 'Abd-isho of Kartaw." This latter ascetic had
no door to his cell so that no man could come into
his cell, and he could go out to no man. Now he was
exceedingly poor, and he had no care for his dwelling-
place even so also was the holy man Gabriel-and he
was like the ostriches and other birds, [and he lived]
remote and in solitude away from disturbing influences
in the voluntary poverty of his mind.
In the mountain of Zinai³ there lived tried solitaries,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="382"/> and discreet anchorites, concerning one of
whom whose name was Amonius the [following] wonder-
ful thing is told. Every wild goat which had fallen
from a rock or any high place, and injured itself, came
to him to be healed; and once when his servant, [who
* See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 215, note 1715.
2 The Kartaw-Kurds lived in the country to the west of
the Lower Zab, above Arbela; see Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 207,
note 1639.
See supta, p. 10S, note 4.
nnnn
<pb n="650"/>was] a believing man, went to carry [his] food to him,
he found there with him a she-goat with her leg broken,
and it had been set and bound up by that holy old
man, and her two young ones were with her. And
as a proof of the truth of [this] wonderful thing the
believing man took one of the young ones, and brought
[it] to his village, and I have seen people who saw that
kid which lived tame in the village from year to year.
At that time certain holy fathers flourished in the
government of the Church. On the throne of Arbela
[sat] the blessed Metropolitan, Mâr Aḥâ,' and after him
the marvellous Mâr Mâran-ammeh, and after them Mâr
Isho-yahbh³ the Metropolitan. Now the venerable
Rabban Gabriel flourished during the life-time of those
three Metropolitans who wrought many mighty deeds
during their governorships, and as he sprang from
this country which was [under] their jurisdiction, they
had great affection for him, and he was accounted by
them mighty man, and a servant of righteousness.
In the church of the city of Adiabene [there lived]
the holy and praiseworthy Bishop Mår Solomon, [who
was] a fellow-worker with the Apostles, and who, like
Peter, by his command only used to drive away re-
fractory devils; he passed over on the top of the great
river Tigris many times, and he cursed the wicked
man Kardagh, and made a horn to grow out of his
forehead. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="383"/> But why should I weary my fingers
with writing his glorious deeds? for behold they are
* See Thomas of Margâ, Bk. ii. chaps 34-39, supra,
pp. 248-262.
2 See supra, p. 304 ff.
3. e., Isho-yahbh of Adiabene; see Thomas of Margâ,
Bk. ii. chaps 7-10, supra, p. 131.
+ St. Mark iii. 15, 16.
-
<pb n="651"/>
written at great length by his disciples. Now the [hair
of] his head and his beard were shaved off from this
man, worthy of blessing, by a heathen king because of
the conversion which he wrought among the heathen.
Now in the Church on the episcopal throne of
Sinjâr the holy Mâr Shubhḥal-Mâran was being glori-
fied, and all his great and splendid works were super-
human. For when he was appointed Bishop in the
great church of Nisibis,* and was obliged to go to the
Patriarch that [the enthronement] might be performed,
he took the boat in which he embarked from Bâlâdh
to Baghdad in one night,3 [that is] he made the boat
go down to Baghdad; and so also when he came up
he brought the boat in which he sailed back to Baládh
in one night. And [once] when Satan smote his dis-
ciple and blinded his eyes he adjured Satan, and he
I I. e.,
✓✓w, the famous city situated about three days'
journey W. of Môșul. For an Arabic derivation of the name
of the place, and for the legends which relate that the ark of -
Noah rested near here, see Yâķût, tom. iii. p. 158f.
2 The name of this town occurs in the Assyrian inscriptions
under the forms 111 D. P. Na-sib-na, ||
ED. P. Na-și-bi-na, and 11_SET
D. P. Na-sib-i-na; see Rawlinson, Cuneiform Inscriptions, vol. ii.
pl. 52, l. 176, 366 and 38a; vol. ii. pl. 53, l. 43; and Bezold,
Catalogue, p. 224.
3 I have been told at Môşul that the journey from Môşul
to Baghdad was once made in less than two days by a man
sitting upon two inflated sheep-skins at the time of the spring
floods, and with a very full river it is just possible that a man
might be carried from Bâlâdh near Eski-Môşul to Baghdad in
forty-eight hours. The journey from Baghdad to Môșul is per-
formed by the post in from three and a half to five days; the
distance by road via Kerkûk is about 300 miles.
<pb n="652"/>brought stones upon an ass for the building of his
church instead of his servant.
THOMAS OF MARGA, THE BOOK OF GOVERNORS.
In the country of Ḥânâitha,' in a mountain half way
towards Ma allthâ, there dwelt a certain solitary whose
name was Mârôi, and on the mountain of a village
near him there lived a dragon which used to come -
each day and carry off an ox from the herd. And when
those men came to him, and wept before him con-
cerning the injuries which they [suffered] from that
destructive beast, he went with them to the dragon's
cave; and when the dragon saw them he hissed like
a serpent and came down against them, and the holy
old man cursed him, and straightway he became like a
senseless stone. And he stands [there] to this day, and is
like unto a clay building, and those who pass along
the road rest under his shadow, and marvelling, praise
God and bless that holy man, and make entreaty for
his prayers.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="384"/> And on the episcopal throne of Salâkh³
there shone with apostolic light the holy Bishop Mâr
Isho-zěkhâ, who came from the country of Bêth Ar-
mâyê; this [holy] man cursed certain large vine be-
longing to some proud and insolent men, and tore it
up by its roots.
In Salâkh Gâwaitâ³ there was a village called 'Ulâi, 6
* Read Henâithâ. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 216ff.
* See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 210.
3 I. c., the city of Seleucia.
4 I. e., from the country round about Seleucia. See Hoffmann,
Auszüge, p. 252ff.
5 See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 244ff. and supra, p. 316, note 4.
6 All the MSS. have Sos, but in the Syriac text, p. 110.
16, the name is spelt S.
<pb n="653"/>
the inhabitants of which had but recently become con-
verted to the way of Christ, and when they built a
church in their village they endowed it with a thicket
of many nut trees; but when those old men were dead
their children raised a dispute about the nut trees,
and took possession of them. And when this holy
man went to them the priests of that church laid a
complaint before him against the believing men; the
believing men said, "They are ours", and the priests
said, "[They belong to] the church." Then the holy
Iman stood up and prayed, and said before them all,
"I trust in our Lord, Whom I serve, that if those nut
trees belong to the believing men they will remain in
their place[s]. but if they [belong] to the church that
Christ will bring them to the courtyard of the church.”
And when the night had passed, and they came early
in the morning, behold, they saw that the whole of
that thicket had departed [and come] near the church,
without any one of the trees having [suffered] injury,
or leaving behind any of its roots in its former posi-
tion; and all those who saw and heard [this] glorified
God. 3
And again, in the Monastery of Rabban Aphni
Måran the truly venerable and holy Abbâ bar-Dairâ
the anchorite put forth signs and mighty works, which
.ܕܗܘ ܕܕܡܗܝܺܡܐ and read ܕ We must add -
2 Read.
3 This story is told at greater length in Bk. ii. chap. 32,
supra, p. 239.
* See Bk. ii. chaps. 3 and 41, supra, pp. 121, 273. Aphni
Mâran flourished about A. D. 622, and his monastery was built
in the diocese of Môşul; see B. O., ii. p. 422; iii. 1. p. 187.
note I.
<pb n="654"/>are greater than any related in history; it is not how-
ever, our affair to relate things about him, but that
of the holy men who have composed accounts of his
noble deeds.
In the Monastery of Bar-Ṭurâ' there shone like a
heavenly star with the light of his holiness, the blessed ⚫
Abba Mark, who put the heathen to shame, and exalt-
ed the horn of the Church by the noble deeds which
he shewed forth before multitudes of people.
And in those days and times, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="385"/> the monk
and ascetic the holy Abbâ 'Anân-Isho, who is worthy.
of being mentioned with all the righteous, built and
completed the monastery near the city of Ḥadhatta,
and he established a famous congregation by the mighty
deeds and wonders which our Lord wrought by his
hands.
In the country of Beth Bĕghâsh the holy Bishop
Mâr Simon³ was glorious in his ecclesiastical pasture
and government which was [situated] there; he it was
who built the church in the village of Shalmath* when
he was a teacher there, and he shewed forth many
healings in the world in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ. During the time of his episcopate the mention
of his name was a subject for boasting for all Chris-
tians, and even after his departure from the tabernacle
of his holy bones every healing of the body and of
See B. O, iii. I. p. 343, col. 2, where this monastery is
mentioned as being with Bêth 'Âbhê freed from the jurisdiction
of the Bishop.
* See Hoffmann, Auszüge, pp. 223, 227.
3 See Bk. ii. chap. 39, supra, p. 262.
* We should probably distinguish this Shalmath from the
Shalmath mentioned by Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 224.
<pb n="655"/>
the soul was vouchsafed unto whomsoever took refuge
in him.
These and such-like wonderful things were per-
formed by the hands of these holy men, [to write] the
noble deeds of each of whom would require a history
to be specially devoted to the purpose; I have, how-
ever, written down the histories of certain of them in
another book. Now inasmuch as I have made mention
of them twice, (I did so] the first time, that I might
make manifest what lamps were shining in the Church
in the days of Rabban Gabriel, and the second time,
that those who read this book might hearken to [the
account of] his wonderful deeds, and might not remain
unbelievers when they hear repeated before them [the
story of] the mighty works which our Lord wrought
by the hands of this member of His household.
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="386"/>
CHAPTER XVI.
OF THE REVELATIONS CONCERNING THINGS OF THE FUTURE
WHICH THE HOLY RABBAN MAR GABRIEL' RECEIVED FROM
GOD.
Unto what limit now shall we extend our feeble
discourse in demonstrating the greatness of this marvel-
lous man? Let us come now, little by little, and as
it were by brief signs and indications we will [first]
relate concerning the revelations which came to him,
and afterwards [we will speak] about the miracles and
* The forms of this name used by Thomas are ✓
.ܓܒܪܝܠ and ܓܕܪܝܠ ܓܒܪܐܝܠ
<pb n="656"/>mighty works which he wrought, and thus with the
steps of [our] narrative of him we shall travel on to
the conclusion of [this] history.
Who now is unacquainted with 'Amran bar-Muḥam-
mad' of the family of el-Azd, who was descended
from the [tribe of] the great Taiman,³ the exceedingly
stubborn servant whose asperity was softened and mol-
lified by means of this holy head? Now before this
Arab came to this country, God, the Lord of all, had
revealed before the eyes of the mind of the holy man
the beginning and end of this man, and concerning
his children, and his childrens' children, for five gene-
rations; and he became known to him in this wise:-
Rabban once wished to sell certain oxen of the herd
belonging to the monastery to provide for the minis-
tration of the brethren, and he sent ten oxen with a
monk to the market of the village of Yazdainâbhâdh,*
and he commanded him, saying, "Take these oxen,
and go to Yazdaiṇâbhâdh, and do not take them into
the market, but pasture them above the village. And
behold, a man will come to you mounted upon a horse,
and will haggle concerning their price with thee with
,According to Ibn Haukal. عمران بن محمد الازدى . . :
the Banû 'Imrân, a branch of the tribe of el-Azd, were settled
in Kurdistân. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 254, note 1867; and
Thomas of Margà, Bk. iv. chap. 21, supra, p. 450, note 1.
22), "the man of el-Azd."
3 translates the Heb. and (Payne Smith,
Thes., col. 1606) Taiman is the district called Yemen,
by the Arabs. For the place called 'Imrânîya, see Hoffmann,
Auszüge, pp. 200, 224, and compare Corpus Inscriptionum
Semiticarum, Pars ii. tom. 1. Fasc. I. p. 107.
also written ; see Nöldeke, Geschichte der
Perser, p. 334; and Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 218, note 1739.
<pb n="657"/>
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="387"/> many words, but thou shalt not strike a bargain
with him, neither shalt thou accept their price from him.
And when he shall say to thee, Wait until I bring
thee their price,' thou shalt say to him, 'Thus saith
Mâr Gabriel, Whenever it is easy for thee, take their
price and come [with it] to me to the monastery'."
And when that brother had gone and had done as he
had been commanded, behold 'Amran came, and when
he saw the oxen he turned aside [to look at] them.
And having enquired about their condition he said,
"Hast thou brought them to sell?" and the brother
answered and said to 'Amran, "What is thy name?"
and he said, "Why askest thou concerning my name?"
The monk said, "My father Rabban Gabriel command-
ed me, saying, 'Behold a certain Ishmaelite whose name
is 'Amran will come to thee, deliver the oxen to him
freely, and say to him, I know that thou hast not the
money to pay for them, but whenever God hath made
it ready for thee, take [it] and come [with it] to me
to the monastery that I may see thee'." And when
'Amran heard these things [about himself from] this
holy old man who was not even acquainted with him,
for he had not as yet entered into [his] inheritance of
the estates of Margâ,' he marvelled and was astonished,
and he knew that this man must be great, for, said
he, "He saw my coming to the market, and saw that I
wished to buy oxen;" and he knew and perceived with
his soul's understanding that the esteem of the Christ-
ians was mighty and exalted before God, for behold
their holy men see and know the things which are
hidden. So he took the oxen and went [his way], and
See Bk. IV. chap. 21, supra, p. 450.
0000
<pb n="658"/>the monk returned to Rabban and informed him of all
that had happened meanwhile; and Rabban was silent
and answered never a word. Now after a day or two
behold 'Amran knocked at the door [of the monastery],
and when they opened the door for him and he had
gone in he asked for Rabban and fell down upon the
ground before him, and Rabban kissed him on the
head and blessed him; <pb type="textAllignment"  n="388"/> and 'Amran brought
[out] the money, the price of the oxen. And as he
I was sitting down he embraced Rabban's legs as a mark
of honour, and entreated him to pray for him, and
Rabban answered and said to him, "If thou wilt es-
tablish a covenant before God and before myself that
thou wilt not slay the Christians, I will reveal to thee
what thou shalt become, and what shall happen to thy
children, and to thy children's children." And he swore
before him, saying, "From this day and henceforth to
the most remote time,³ among the Christians a man
like unto thyself I will never harm. Thou hast heard
concerning the children of Bôzî, but they acted wicked-
ly towards me, and exasperated me with their fables
and pride." The blessed man answered and said to
him, "If thou wilt restrain thy sword from the people
of God, behold God will make thee, and thy children,
and thy children's children to inherit peacefully all this
country of Margâ, and the men who shall arise from
* Read
Soilo.
* The "children of Bôzi" seem to have been a Kurdish or
Persian family from whom the place
took its name,
and it would appear from Thomas of Margâ's report of 'Amran's
conversation that they had been driven out of their dwelling-
place by the Banû Imrân; see Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 196.
<pb n="659"/>
thy seed shall become strong and mighty, and no man
shall be able to stand before them and conquer. Like
Nisân' with its blossoms and flowers, and the vine
with its clusters of grapes, even so shall they be distin-
guished in their appearance and strength from the other
families of the Arabs. Thus hath it been revealed to
me by God, in comparison with the love of Whom I
count the whole world as nothing, and I entreat thee
to command the sons whom God shall raise up from
thee to shew love to the Christians, and especially to
the monasteries and convents, and to ascetics, and
scholars, and priests, and deacons." And 'Amran under-
took to act according to the command of Rabban, and
he did so, and he likewise commanded his sons to do
So. Such was the revelation which appeared to the
holy old man.
And again, there were three hamlets near the mon-
astery of the holy man, the inhabitants of which, together
with all the heathen, robbed and vexed this holy house;
and when the brethren made a complaint [to Rabban],
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="389"/> he said to them merely, "They will be made
desolate utterly", and this actually came to pass.
Moreover, by the [gift of] prophecy which dwelt in
him he made known concerning the revolt in the
kingdom which took place before this our generation.
And as we have said above, he shewed aforetime to
the brethren concerning the desolation of the Monastery
of Malbadh, and the ruin of all his family, and of the
I. e., part of April and May.
معبد بن حرملة الشيبانی It is not probable that
is
the 2
whose acts are described in Ibn al-Athîr, tom. v. pp. 369-371.
We are told by Thomas of Margâ, (supra, p. 650) that Gabriel
<pb n="660"/>glory which descended* not after him; and behold the
sight of that ruined and desolate place testifieth to the
words of the holy man.
-
And he shewed aforetime concerning the death,
which should take place before his own, of his beloved
fellow-labourer and ascetic Abbâ Dômat (Domitius) of
Bêth Abhê, and when that holy old man was dying
[Rabban] said to the brethren, who were in his mon-
astery, "In this night shall the perfection of the blessed
Abba Dômat (Domitius) be accomplished, and his soul
shall be exalted to the treasuries of heaven; this day
shall Satan, the foe of holy men, be put to shame by
reason of the escape of that divine old man from his
crafty wiles."
Now divine visions which surpassed our knowledge
appeared to him frequently, but through the negligence
of authors they have not been set down in writing; we,
however, by a very few of the things which have been
said about him, like a drop of rain out of the whole
shower, or like a single block of stone out of the whole
mountain, make known to what measure [of power] this
divine man attained.
was a contemporary of Mâr Aḥâ, Mâr Mâran-'ammeh and Mâr
Isho-yahbh [of Adiabene], and we know that these Metropolitans
lived in the VIIth century of our era;
however,
died about A. H. 137 (A. D. 754), and if he had been a con-
temporary of Mâr Ahâ he must have been considerably more
than 100 years old at the time of his death. For the account
of Malbadh's monastery see Bk. VI. chap. 13, supra p. 639.
* Hoffmann prefers to read
"which should not
live after him."
<pb n="661"/>
CHAPTER XVII.
OF THE WONDERS, AND MIGHTY WORKS OF HEALING, AND
CURES OF ALL KINDS WHICH WERE WROUGHT BY THE
HANDS OF RABBAN GABRIEL.
Let us now turn, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="390"/> the might of the prayer of this
holy man cleaving unto us, to the mighty deeds which
Christ wrought, and the wonders which He shewed
forth by his hands. "A city which is built upon a
mountain cannot be hid," as [long as] it pleaseth Christ
our Lord, and according to His command, neither may
His disciples conceal His mysteries and revelations.
Now although certain holy men have excelled in mighty
works of excellence, yet wonders and the working of
mighty deeds have not been performed by their hands;
and this did not happen through any defect or lack of
renown on their part, but because God, the only wise
Being, giveth to every man that [gift] which is most-
suitable for him. And because human nature is deceit-
ful, and Satan lieth³ in wait continually, and lurketh*
St. Matthew v. 14.
2, qui hallucinatur, - Gr. 10; see Payne Smith,
Thes., col. 1501.
32 For other examples of this word see Land, Anecdota,
tom. ii. p. 262, 1. 2; p. 336, 1. 2; Hoffmann, Syr. Arab. Glossen,
No. 1463, p. 51; Thomas of Margâ, text, p. 397, 1. 5.
4 All the MSS. have, but Hoffmann thinks that we
should read "and lurketh in secret places," which gives
much better sense. The noun occurs also in the Chronicle
of Bar-Hebraeus, ed. Bruns, p. 336, l. 16 (rendered "explora-
tores"); and in Cureton, Eccles. Hist. of John of Ephesus,
p. 345, 22 (rendered "hordes" by Payne Smith in his trans-
lation, Oxford, 1860, p. 371). The word is explained by
<pb n="662"/>to compass its ruin, especially in the case of holy men
and of those who have often cut through his snares
and laughed at his wily tricks, our Lord God withholds
from certain men this gift of healing. For behold, we
see that to the divine Paul, who was the tongue of
Christ,' who fulfilled His designs, and who was the great
pillar and father of the churches of the Gentiles which
had been sanctified by his hands with the mark of the
. Cross of Christ, was delivered a goad for his flesh,³
the messenger' of Satan, which was his moderate
weakness, lest by the excellence of the revelations and
signs which he used to work, after he had preached
to others he himself might become a castaway." So
then everything cometh from the will of the Governor,'
Who, according to His inscrutable fore-knowledge, per-
fecteth in those who are participators in His counsel
those things which are administered for the common
good. Now this holy man, our father Mâr Gabriel,
ܣܝܐܰܬܐ ܕܠܣܛܝܐ ܕܣܢܒܝܢ. ܐܘܟܝܬ ܡܠܣܛܝܢ ܠܒܢܝܐ ܐܝܠܝܢ ambnsh', and by““
bands of thieves ܕܡܬܚܒܪܝܢ ܠܐܚܪܢܐ ܒܓܘܫܝܐ ܘܢܩܦܝܢ ܠܡܓܢܒ ܘܠܡܪܕܒܘ܀
who lie in wait, that is to say, thieves who plunder people,
and who band themselves together with others in revolt, and
unite together to rob and steal;" see Duval, Lexicon, col. 1147.
Compare "band of brigands,”
Dozy, Supplément, p. 408, col. 2.
,"voleur قناب and
* Read, and compare on B. O., iii. 1. p. 119,
1. 24.
* Read, according to Hoffmann, p.
32 Corinthians xii. 7.
* Literally, "the angel of Satan."
5 I Corinthians ix. 27.
6 I. e., revelations and signs.
.ܕܡܟܝܢ ܟܠܗܘܢ ܕܨܒܝܢܗ ܗܘ ܕܡܕܒܪܢܐ Read 1
<pb n="663"/>
having aforetime, from the beginning of his discipleship,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="391"/> embraced humility, chose to be considered of
no account and unknown, and he passed the whole
period of his life in this [manner], even until his old age,
when by the Divine choice he was called to the head-
ship of this holy monastery, and our Lord gave by
his hands mighty deeds and gifts which fell short in no-
thing of those possessed by the early fathers. And, not with-
¸standing that he was the fountain and origin of the healings
which were wrought by him, many afflictions came upon
him from the wicked men who were his neighbours
in this place, whom Satan, the enemy of our master,
stirred up [against him] every day and always, and
they were gathered together against him with threats
and curses to put him to shame in this place, as after-
wards, little by little, by the help of God we will prove
with our words.
Now when Rabban [Gabriel] lived in the Monastery
of Mâr John, and was carrying out his customary duties,
a certain man from the village of Tella' came to him
in the month of* Îlûl, and said to him sadly, "The vines
in our village have been severely smitten by the hail,
and my vine only remaineth uninjured." The blessed
man said to him, "My son, a punishment hath been
sent upon you by God for your benefit, and whoso-
ever receiveth the chastisement of the Lord, the Lord
will bind up his wound. Had the hail smitten thy
vine also it would have been for thy benefit; but thou
must know that destruction [of thy vine] awaiteth thee.
If the sin is the sin of the whole community, the chas-
tisement also must be of the whole community." And
* A village in Margâ; see Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 227.
2 I. c., 58, part of August and September.
<pb n="664"/>that man went and pressed the grapes of his vine,
and he poured his wine into a wine jar and sealed it;
and when he went back to look at it on the following
day, behold the wine jar was empty and there was
nothing inside it. Thus the words of Rabban were
actually fulfilled.
Once while he lived in the cell of Mâr John, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="392"/>
when he was sitting in front of his cell and reading a
book, an eagle came and carried off a kid of the goats
belonging to the monastery. And when Rabban saw
that the kid bleated, and that the eagle was carrying
it up to his nest to devour, he said to the eagle, "For
the sake of our Lord let down carefully what thou hast
taken"; and the eagle, as if some heavy thing were
hanging from him, let the kid down little by little,
and laid it on the ground without injury, and spread
out his wings and flew away. And all those who heard
concerning these things from the shepherd, praised
God, but because they were the beginning of the
miracles of the blessed man they were perturbed and
frightened. And the holy man answered and said to
them, "My brethren, be not astonished at this thing
which hath taken place, for it hath not happened
through my power, but by God, Who hath made mani-
fest these things on your account; I am a weak man
and a sinner, and this hath been wrought by your
prayers. Every wild animal, and beast, and bird, and rep-
tile is made subject unto divine and holy men,' even as
* A wild ass was obedient to Antony; Paul of the Thebaïd
handled snakes, serpents and scorpions with impunity; a croco-
dile carried Pachomius across the Nile at his command; a hippo-
potamus forsook the country at the command of Beno; a ser-
pent was obedient to Hilarion; a monk lived in the Cave of
<pb n="665"/>
it was to Noah at the door of his ark, for the God
of the people of these last times is the God of the
ancients.
Another time also there came to him a certain
Persian believer from the village of Beth Ķewâz, which
[is situated] on the Great Zab, leading with him his
two sons who were vexed by evil spirits; the name
of the one was Noah, and that of the other Marwâ,
and he entreated Rabban to pray for them. Then
Rabban commanded and the boys were brought to
him, and he anathematized those devils, saying, “In the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, Who cast out legions³
from him who dwelt among the tombs, I command you
to come forth from these boys"; and while the brethren
were standing before him and all looking on, [the devils]
came forth from their mouths in the form of fire. Thus
by the word of Rabban <pb type="textAllignment"  n="393"/> they received healing
from the vexation of obstinate devils, and that man
returned to his house rejoicing and praising God.
One day a mad dog came forth from the village
of Niram, and as it passed by some children who were
playing, it fell upon one whose name was Mârôn, and
tore open his belly, and his bowels came out freely,
and his parents carried him and brought him to Rabban.
And when he saw him he was much grieved for him,
and he commanded and they put the child's bowels
back into his belly, and he made the sign of the Cross
over them, and thus by the word of Rabban the wound
was healed.
Sapsa with lions; and Macarius had two lions whom he called
"Little sons." See Rosweyde, Vitae Patrum, pp. 49, 650, 120,
459, 84, 857 and 228.
St. Mark v. 9.
PPPP
<pb n="666"/>which is situated on the
there was a certain man
In the village of Hețârâ,
[bank of] the river Ḥâzer,
whose name was Naggârâ;³ he belonged to the race
of the Shahrighân,* and had a son whose name was
Maslamah. Now this boy was smitten with a very
virulent sore, and his father sent him to this monas-
tery, and the old man gave him a ḥěnânâ, and com-
manded him not to eat meat or anything of that nature
until the end of the Fast of the Apostles; and when
the fifty days were ended the boy had become whole."
And his father commanded one of the members of his
home to bring some fish from the river, and to carry
[them] with the boy to Rabban, and some they fried
[to eat] in the village, and some they left alive and
took with them as they came to this monastery. And the
young man who was with Maslamâh was a heathen,
and when they drew near to the precincts of the mon-
astery on the first day of the week which ended
the "Week of the Apostles"-now the boy was fasting
to receive the Holy Mysteries-the heathen young man
counselled the boy with the counsel of Eve,' saying,
"Thou art fasting now, and when thou goest to the
monks thou wilt be ashamed to eat, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="394"/> but I will
* See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 185f.
خازر شو Read with BC :
النجار 3
4 See supra, p. 309, note 4.
5 I. c., dins.
6 The Fast of the Apostles lasted seven weeks, namely
from Whit-Sunday to the last Sunday of the Week of
the Apostles called Nausardil; see supra, p. 466, note 3, and
the authorities there quoted.
7 Genesis iii. 6.
<pb n="667"/>
place in this tree a piece of fish with [some] bread,
so that when we come back thou canst eat;" now the
boy did not prevent him, and according to his word
they placed [the meat and bread there], and set forth
[again] on their journey. And when they had gone in
to the old man they laid the basket' of fish before
him, and he commanded the brethren to dress them
by the time of the Holy Mysteries.. And while the
fish, which they were about to fry on the fire in
Rabban's chamber, were lying in the pan, Rabban's
cat came and took one of them. And Rabban answer-
ed and laughing, said to him, "Do not be more greedy
than the brethren, for he that brought the fish did not
receive healing from thee, but through their prayers;
let it go, wretched creature, that chastisement may not
come upon thee;" and with the word of Rabban, a
strong eagle seized the cat and bore him up into the
air. And Rabban said to the eagle, "Let him go and
offend not a second time," and the eagle let him down
and قطعة لحم قدر لهم This word is explained by وas :
.see Brit. Mus, MSS ;ܩܘܦܕܐ ܐܝܟ ܒܪ ܣܪܘ ܗ. ܦܣܩܐ ܕܒܣܦܐ ܕܗܘ ܢܩܣܐ
Rich. 7203, fol. 152a, col. 2; Orient. 2441, fol. 3306, col. 1.
2. e., кάpтallos. Compare Brit. Mus. MS. Orient.
ܩܪܛܠܐ ܐܝܟ ܩܪ ܣܪܘ ܗ. ܙܒܝܠܐ ܓܪ̈ܝܠܐ ܡܢ ܫܒܘܩܐ 1 .fol. 347 8, col ,2441
قراطالات
3 A or, plur. see Budge, Book of the Bee, p.
1. 19, where the word is explained by (sing.
Chald.), and Wright, Kalilah and Dimnah, pp. 172,
1. 22; 175, 1.15; 209, 22; 263, 11; and 367, 16 (on p. 263,
1. 18, is feminine). Compare the Arabic ☑, plur. blhi;
and Payne Smith, Thes., col. 1790. in Brit. Mus.
MS. Orient. 2441, fol. 333%, col. 1.
<pb n="668"/>and laid him upon the ground uninjured; and the young
men and the brethren marvelled and were astonished.
And with this miracle the blessed man wrought
also another wonderful thing at the table in the refec-
tory while they were eating. When the brethren had
taken the gift and had sat down to eat the good things*
which the Lord had brought to them, Maslamâh and
his companion ate with deliberation." And Rabban
said to Maslamáh,³ "My son, see what this my servant
telleth me." Now the old man had as his disciple a
young man whose name was Ķuphrâ,* the son of Sabhr-
Isho, a believer [who came] from Niram, a village of
shepherds, and when many illnesses had waxed strong
in him, his father set him apart to become the servant
of Rabban, if ever he should become well, and by the
mediation of this holy man this actually came to pass,
and he became a disciple, and a monk, and afterwards
head of a monastery. At that moment this young man
was standing before Rabban, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="395"/> and to him Rabban
directed the gaze of the boy Maslamâh, saying, "This
[my] servant counselleth thee to eat abundantly, for a
crow hath carried off that which ye hid in a tree."
And with the word of Rabban, behold [there came]
upon the roof a large black crow, [holding] in his beak
the bread and the fish which the young men had hidden
in the tree; thus astonishment about the crow and what
he carried followed closely upon their wonder con-
* Literally, "the grace", or "the charity"; meaning the fish.
MAN
3 B has, which is an older orthography.
* A shortened form of
?
.ܥܘܪܒ ܵRead 5
<pb n="669"/>
cerning the cat.'
These and such-like things were
wrought by the hands of this our prophet.
At another time there came to him a certain be-
lieving man from Nineveh (Môşul), who, although he
had lived with his wife a long time, was not called
the father of children; to him Rabban gave a ḥěnânâ,
and having prayed for him, he dismissed him, and
three children were born to him through the prayers
of Rabban, and he also was called the father of children.
A certain man from the village of Amûlḥir' was
sorely vexed by Satan, and he shouted out with cries
by day and by night, and he was brought to Rabban
by his parents; and as soon as he had gone into the
martyrium and Rabban had anointed him with the oil
of prayer,' he was made whole, and became free from
attack.
And a certain man from the village of Birtâ who had
no children, came and knocked at the door of the old
man with supplication, and asked for his prayers, and
in due time twins were born to him. And Rabban
commanded him to minister unto the poor and the
strangers "in return for the double blessing which God
hath given thee;" and that believer undertook and did
according to the command of Rabban.
In the village of Niram there was a woman who
was a ministrant unto rebellious devils. And when she
1
Arabic
Talm. N) (Buxtorf, ed. Fischer, p. 1232, col. 1),
In Mas'ûdî (Les Prairies d'Or, ed. Barbier de
Meynard and Pavet de Courteille, tom. iii. p. 13, l. 10) we have
السنانير وهي القطاط
21. See Hoffmann, Auszüge, p. 195.
3 See supra, p. 613, note 1.
ܨܠܘܕܐ Read ،
<pb n="670"/>Isaw the mighty deeds and wonders which the holy
man was working against the devils her masters, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="396"/>
she set herself in opposition to him, that they might
make an end of him and destroy him out of the world.
And although Rabban had known concerning her for
some time past, he had never done her any harm, nor
given information concerning her; now this woman set
her face to slay Rabban, whom the wretched creature
was not only not able to harm in any way, but she,
the wretched creature, destroyed herself. And she took
in her bosom some dried white grapes and went straight
to him; now Rabban was saying Compline at the door
of the martyrium. And when she saw him, she bowed
down before him, and reproaching him in, as it were, a
loving manner said, “Because I am a poor and sinful
woman, thou neither liftest up my head, nor takest ány
care for me, as thou dost for the other widows whom
thou feedest." And the holy man rebuked her, saying,
"Depart, wretched woman, thou hast no need of sus-
tenance at my hands, for thou hast other protectors;"
but she did not understand that he spake of the devils
whom she served, and sighing she sadly entreated him
:ܟܢܦܗ Read ܃
This martyrium is, in Nestorian Monasteries, a
chapel lying on the left or north side of the K, or
square in which the altar stands; it is entered through two doors,
one being to the north of the кórn, and the other at the east
end of the left aisle or side nave. Here the
or place
where Compline was sung, must have been immediately before
the door of the martyrium and have formed the left part of
what Badger calls the chancel, i. e., the space before the closed
кórn, where the lecterns stood. In this case that part of the
church was accessible to every body, and the appearance of
this woman in it can be readily explained.
<pb n="671"/>
to receive the few dried grapes which she had brought
to him. And Rabban, knowing of the strange power
that was hidden therein, answered and said to her,
"Get thee gone, woman; I have harmed thee in no
way, what hast thou to do with me? Light hath no
portion with darkness, neither can the adorers of the
Cross be participators in the table and the food' of
devils." Now although [Rabban had spoken] thus, she
nevertheless dared to throw the grapes down upon
the doorstep of the martyrium before the holy old man,
and she left [him] and went away. And as Rabban
was singing the psalm, with the top of his staff he
traced [a figure of] the Cross over and among them,
and they were straightway changed into large, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="397"/>
strong wasps. And they flew after that despicable
woman and overtook her on the road, and they took
vengeance upon her for the insult to the holy man,
and they stung her upon her face and head, and she
died immediately, and fell into the river; and every
Iman was astonished at the terrible death which had
happened to the wretched woman.
And again the Calumniator, who wishes to make a
mock of the holy men of our Lord, and who was
lurking in ambush and watching for the ruin of that
mighty old man, into whom none of his arrows ever
stuck, and whom no spiritual or corporeal blemish
ever touched, brought upon him, and upon his mon-
astery innumerable trials, in which Rabban was vic-
torious, and inflicted severe defeat upon his enemy, who
125 see supra, p. 390, note I.
2 I. c., the Hazer,
32, see supra, p. 661, note 3.
.ܩܬܬ V ܟܲܕ ܪ
<pb n="672"/>sometimes troubled him by the stubborn heathen, and
sometimes by other afflictions.
Now there lived in the village of Beth Obhîd' a
woman who was exceedingly beautiful, and she set the
beauty with which mortal nature had endowed her as
a stumbling-block for the children of the race of mankind,
and Satan invited and led on this woman [to attempt]
the ruin of this divine man. And she rose up and
adorned herself like a harlot with all the ornaments
which stir up lust for women in men, and she put kohl
on her eyes, and tired her head like Jezebel, and like
Jezebel she also was about to drink the cup of the
wrath of the Lord; and she hung upon herself all her
ornaments of gold and silver, and she rose up and set
out from the village and made her journey to the mon-
astery of Rabban. Now Rabban was among a great
crowd of people who were sick and afflicted with
devils, and she also went in among them all breathing
forth the evil smelling scent of her perfumes, and she
waited until every one had gone forth on his way.
And when she saw that Rabban remained alone she
dared to stand before him with her face uncovered,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="398"/> and she showed him her beauty without shame.
And Rabban answered in his accustomed gracious
manner, and said to her, "What is the cause of thy
بيت عبيد I :
2 Compare 2 Kings ix. 30; and Jeremiah iv. 30. The r
5 occurs in Ezekiel xxiii. 40; compare to paint the
eyes with J. The use of mestchemet or "eye-paint" in
Egypt is as old as the time of Unas, who reigned about B. C.
3300, and a wall painting at Beni-hasan in Upper Egypt proves
that as early as about B. C. 2500 mestchemet or "eye paint"
was brought to Egypt from Syria.
<pb n="673"/>
coming here?" and the audacious woman said to him,
"I have come to thee that I may sleep with thee this
night and that thou mayest be united with me." And
Rabban was passionately enraged with her, and he
cursed her, and she fell down on her face straightway,
and he called brother Kuphrâ his servant to gather
her up, and commanded him to drag her outside; and
she went to her village in great pain, and on the
morning of the morrow she was buried, and behold
she was reserved for a judgment more bitter than
death. And this thing was known to all who dwelt
in the country, and they glorified our Lord Who made
the holy man victorious, because by the memory of
her [whom] the holy man burnt up with his curses and
destroyed, the lust of the lascivious perished.
And on a certain day the heathen from the hamlets
round about came by night and fell upon Beth Ḥěsîkhé,*
the forest of the monastery, with axes and scythes,
and they mercilessly hacked and hewed and threw down
[the trees]; and they at the same time were making
threats against the monastery, saying, "We will burn
it with fire, and we will make it a waste place as
if it had never existed;" and when the sacristan went
out to strike the board for morning [prayer], he heard
the noise of those that were cutting the trees, and he
i. c., the dense thicket of the forest which hid
and protected the monastery. For the word used in this
outside the woods and ܠܒܪ ܡܢ ܥܬܐ ܘܚܣܝܣܐ ܕܩܝܣܐ sense compare
places defended by trees;" see Cureton, John of Ephesus,
p. 402, 1. 24; and Payne Smith, Thes., col. 1331. A Mon-
astery of is mentioned in B. O., ii. p. 65, 1. 26.
2 Read
9999
<pb n="674"/>went in and informed Rabban. And the holy man
went out to speak with them, and to admonish them
for their daring-behaviour, but the children of destruction
poured out insulting words upon him, and with bitter
pain in his heart he cursed them as Elisha cursed the
children, and straightway the angel of the Lord slew
them with the exception of one who remained [alive]
to proclaim their audacious behaviour. Thus the prayer
of this altar of prayer was heard and accepted, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="399"/>
and at the first moving of his request the work [of
destruction] was performed.
And again Satan, who desired their destruction,
inflamed [the hearts of] the inhabitants of a village
called Beth Ţimai, who were heathen, and evil livers, and
thieves, to come and smite the monks and to plunder
the community; and when they had come and many
of the brethren had been badly wounded, and had had
their bones broken by them, the [other] brethren went
in and informed Rabban of the audacious violence³ of
those godless men. And Rabban admonished the brethren,
saying, "My sons, for the sake of Christ, your Lord,
endure insults and blows from [your] enemies, for He
said, 'In the world ye shall have tribulation'; + and what
Iman or what saint ever departed from [this] world
2
* 2 Kings ii. 23.
Hoffmann considers to be a name of endearment
.ܒܝܬ ܛܝܡܬܐܘܣ or a diminutive of
32
Compare
No. 1378, p. 48;
stände, p. 14, l. 1; and
Bee, p. 1. 20.
St. John xvi. 33.
Hoffmann, Syr.-Arab. Glossen,
Ahrens, Buch der Naturgegen-
Budge, Book of the
<pb n="675"/>
I
without affliction?" And while Rabban was admonish-
ing and exhorting his disciples with such words as
these, those men from Bêth Ṭimai seized the herd of
cattle [belonging] to the community and departed, and
they hid themselves in a certain place called Bêth
Saphwân, so that when the night came they might
carry the oxen away unobserved to a distance and
sell them. Now when it was evening Rabban went
forth after them secretly, and he went into the wood
and took with him two fierce lions, and drew near to
those wretched men. And when they saw him and the
lions, [one] on his right hand, and [one] on his left,
and saw that they were ready at his command to
swiftly destroy them, mounting upon rocks, and hiding
in caves they adjured him by his God to take what
belonged to him, and to save their lives from destruction
by those cruel lions; and they swore to him that they
would never come back to the monastery. And the
holy man spake to them darkly, saying, "I trust in God,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="400"/> Whom I serve, that from this day and hence-
forth ye will need neither to buy nor to sell, nor to
go forth outside the borders of your village, but that
ye may rest in relaxation and peace for ever, and that
ye may not wake up until the time appointed before-
hand for this universe." And the men worthy of woe
rose up and went to their village, and the Lord destroyed
them in a short time, and their village was made a
desolation for ever, so much so that even its name
and memorial were blotted out entirely from this earth.
And the holy man took the herd of cattle and returned
.ܡܨܓܒܬܐ for ܡܣܛܒܬܐ like ,ܨܦܘܢ for ܣܦܘܢ -
.ܕܠܐ ܚܙܘܐ ܢܘܒܠܘܢ We should read something like 2
<pb n="676"/>to the monastery in the evening when it was quite
dark; and this wonder was proclaimed throughout all
the country.
And again when the 'Amran bar-Muḥammad-whom
we have mentioned above-had gone in and inherited
the lands [round about], and with them also Niram of
the shepherds, in which he lived, because of the love
which he had for this righteous man-for he had
actually done what Rabban asked him [to do] -he
called to one of his servants and said to him, "Go to
Rabban Gabriel and say to him, if he has a little wheat,
let him lend it to us, and as soon as we bring the corn
into the granary we will pay him double." Now it was
the season of Nisan' when it happeneth that many
people are in need [of wheat]. And when he that had
been sent had come [to Rabban], the holy old man
rose up and shewed him a hollow³ in the ground, that
is to say, a pit, full of wheat, and said to him, "Behold,
my son, take all this wheat and carry it to thy master".
And this servant took up out of the pit as many loads
as he pleased, leaving, however, some behind, for he
was mindful not to take all the grain, having compassion
for the brethren that they themselves might not lack.
And he left [the monastery] and went to ʻAmran, and
when 'Amran asked him if any [wheat] was left in the
pit, he was afraid of his master's violence, and told
him, saying, "I did leave a little there for the food of
the monastery and of the old man." <pb type="textAllignment"  n="401"/> Then
'Amran according to his cruel disposition asked him
See pp. 450, 656.
2 I. e., "springtime".
3 op See Bk. v. chap. II, supra, p. 513, note 2.
<pb n="677"/>
to go back and bring also what was left, saying,
"Rabban Gabriel will lack nothing." And when the
servant had gone back to the old man he made the
matter known to Rabban, who answered and said to
him, "O my son, I have lent all the pitful [of wheat]
to 'Amran, do not therefore leave anything in it that
thou dost not carry away." And when the servant
went to the pit he opened it and saw, and behold it
was full to the top as before, and he looked and was
astonished, and he went back having loaded the mule,
and related [the matter] to his master, who marvelled
and was astonished, and did not send again [to Rabban].
How wonderful is the love of God towards holy men,
who having elected to live in penury and to be un-
praised and unknown, in that, contrary to their wishes,
it leadeth on their part to the praise of His great
power, and in such a way that they provoke those
who love its excellence! And this holy person who
I was beloved by his Lord wrought many most astonish-
ing things which were full of His glory. This man
was a prosperous gardener who fenced round his own
vineyard with the sure hedge of keeping the command-
ments, that [wild animals] might not enter in and
destroy the fruits of his sweetness. He was a wise
builder who dug down deep and laid the walls of his
house firmly upon the sure rock of belief, that they
might not move by reason of the blast of the mighty
winds of pride, and that the thief might not enter in
and spoil the riches of his treasure. He was a faithful
* The reading of BCN is preferable here.
ܚܝܘܬܐ ܕܒܪܐ some words like ܦܐܪܐ ܕܚܠܝܘܬܗ W'e must add after 2
<pb n="678"/>steward who laid upon the table before those who
sat at meat in his master's house the portion which
´had been entrusted to him. He was a diligent mariner
who saved his valuable ship from the waves and storms,
<pb type="textAllignment"  n="402"/> and who steered straight out of them for the
quiet harbour. He was a merchant [who] understood
what was advantageous for him, and who laid up his
treasures in heaven above where the fingers of thieves
draw not nigh to plunder the riches of the prosperous.
He was a soldier without blame who went forth to
meet the enemies of his Lord, and who never turned
his back until he had destroyed them. He was a hus-
bandman who sowed the seed wisely, and who cleansed
the field of his thoughts from every plant of stubborn
tares, and he shewed his field [to be] full of choice fat
wheat. He was a valiant warrior who conquered all
the armies of the mighty Philistines³ who had driven
out the upright from the land of promise. He was a
Gideon victorious in the wars of the Lord, who pursued
spiritual Midianites, and took the gold and the crescents³
of their camels, and plundered them until he had made
them pass from out of his dominion. It was in such
a manner that he was victorious, and these and such-
* The allusion here is to his ministering at the Eucharist.
2 St. Matthew vi. 20.
3 I. e., the heathen Kurds and Persians.
* Judges viii. 21.
Heb.
Chald.
“little moons". In Hoff-
mann, Opuscula, p. 96, L. 5, this word is explained by
son "crescents-haped collars (or neck-
chains), that is torques, which are cast in the shape of the new
moon". Another explanation is (Payne Smith, Thes., col. 2539)
"Chains of gold like unto the moon, that is to say the half
.
<pb n="679"/>
like triumphs did he exhibit. What speech can fathom
the hidden virtues of this man, and bring [them] to
the light and shew their glorious character? It is meet
that his praises should be recited by blessed and righteous
men whose discourse is savoury and sweet, in that it
hath been seasoned with the salt of chastity, and
not by ignorant men who are overwhelmed in sin like
myself. It is meet that thy noble triumphs should be
set down in writing, O pearl of asceticism, wherefore
we have made bold to write [the history of them]. We
will attribute honour to thy love, and we will award
gratitude to thy holiness, in order that the dust of thy
limbs, which alive or dead, driveth away devils, and
the vessel in which thy body is laid, may be known
by the prudent and not be despised. And although
it was pleasing to thee in thy life and in thy death
to follow after humility, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="403"/> yet if [thy triumphs]
remain unknown they will bring injury and harm [upon
men]; [therefore we have written them] that they may
be a benefit to them. To thee be praise and to thy
Lord glory!
moon, in which are set precious stones; they also call
that [piece of] iron which is made like the half moon, and
which the Arabs put on their camels above their nostrils." The
Arabs call every thing which has the form of a crescent or
„F I'
املة new moon
* The MSS. have hand, but read 5.
<pb n="680"/>CHAPTER XVIII.
OF THE LAMENTABLE DEATH OF RABBAN GABRIEL, AND OF
HIS DEPARTURE TO THE WORLD OF JOY.
And how much longer shall we weary [our] listeners
with our common and ignorant words? After these
things then, let us proceed and advance to the sick-
ness which smote the holy man, and to those things
which happened during his illness, so that with the
end of his career we may also bring our lines to a
close. Now while that holy man was bringing down
this and such-like help upon all mankind, one by one
the years of his life came to an end, and old age and
feebleness troubled him; day by day he began to complete
the path of his journey in this world and to set out
on the paths of death, so that he also might go and
join all the saints in the never-ending mansions for
which and because of which he had toiled all his days.
And the holy man fell ill of a disease of the bowels
and suffered from diarrhoea for four months, like the
majority of the holy men who have departed and who
will depart from the world. And at the end of the
months of his sickness the report of his departure from
this life was carried to all the nobles and governors
of the country, and they were gathered together and
I came to see him. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="404"/> And the honourable and
noble Zâdôi bar-Zadhbhâh, [who] is worthy of mention
for good because of his noble deeds and his protection
of the schools, for he had taken upon himself the
burden of maintaining them-was also among the many
who came to the monastery to see the holy man, and
the honourable Zâdôi, who was sitting behind Rabban,
supported him in the hour of his death, and he was
<pb n="681"/>
grieved at the departure' of the holy old man. And
while all the brethren were standing before him, (now
some of them were sitting) the eyes of the blessed
man dropped tears of grief, and he wept abundantly.
And when the brethren saw that he wept, all the be-
lievers wept also, saying to him, "If thou weepest, Rabban,
and art grieved at thy departure, what shall we who
are sinners do?" He said to them, "I am not afraid
of death, neither am I grieved at my departure, but
I am afraid of the judgment of our Lord, for God
judgeth by fire. If Saint Paul was terrified at the judg-
ment hall of God and said, 'It is a fearful thing to
fall into the hands of the living God,' who am I that
I should not be stupefied with terror? For I know not
what the Judge will make me hear there, or what an-
swer He will return to me, for I know not whether my
work will be pleasing before Him or not. And behold
I am going along³ a road upon which I have not jour-
neyed, and to a judgment hall of sin into which I have
not entered, and the face of the Judge is terrible to-
wards sinners, among whom I am reckoned. His Holy
Cross shall be an advocate for me before His justice,
and I will take refuge in it;" and as the holy old man
wept and [his] tears poured down wetting his beard
and his neck, a cry went up to heaven from every
man. <pb type="textAllignment"  n="405"/> And after the weeping and the tears
the beauty of grace shone upon his countenance and
drew forth great astonishment from every man, and
the eyes of the brethren and of the believers looked
upon him. And when they saw him in that changed
.ܒܘܚܝ Read -
2 Hebrews x. 31.
3 We must follow the reading of BC here.
TTTT
<pb n="682"/>condition of heavenly splendour, and saw that he had
composed his mind and had become peaceful [after] his
weeping, the brethren and monks answered and said
to him, "Our father, to whom wilt thou leave us? From
this day and henceforth who will hedge us in from
before the enemies by whom we are surrounded?
Whilst thou wast alive they swallowed us up alive,
and when thou art dead what evil will they not make
us suffer? They will certainly make a desolation of
this poor monastery." The blessed man answered and
said to them, "My brethren, take heed to your re-
demption and to your reward, and multiply [your]
prayers for the Church and the government. Pray also
for me that I may have openness of face before our
Lord, [and if it be granted to me] by the fifth day of
the week not one of your enemies shall remain alive;"
and this actually came to pass according to the old
man Rabban's word, for he departed [this] life at dawn
on the fifth day of the week and by the following fifth
day they had all come to an end and perished, [and].
their lands are made desolate unto this day. And
having his mouth filled with praise, and admonishing
and encouraging the brethren not to be cast down be-
fore the afflictions and sufferings and trials from within
and without, he delivered up his soul to his Master
and ended his valiant contest; and immediately the
whole house in which he died was filled with a sweet
smell. And the teachers, and scholars, and priests,
and deacons, and believing men were gathered together
and came to be blessed at the bier of the holy old
man, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="406"/> and every man wept and was sad and mournful
.ܘܩܘܒܝܗܘܢ Read -
<pb n="683"/>
by reason of the departure of [their] father; the monks
for their head and governor who watched on behalf
of their souls; the widows for the supporter of their
lives; the orphans for the foster-father of their destitu-
tion; the poor for the man who filled their bosoms
with his crumbs; the wandering strangers and abjects
for him that gathered together their wanderings [into
a house]; the afflicted for the man who relieved their
need; the troubled for the man who alleviated the
pains of their wounds; the oppressed for him that de-
Ilivered them from their oppressors; the sick for the
physician who healed them for nothing; those who were
in anguish for the consoler of their sorrow; and the
rich because he made their alms wing their way to
heaven. In his death the man who was entirely and
in every way like unto Paul was lamented by every
man. And the venerable and holy body, which was
in truth the fountain of help, was borne with honour
and laid in the south side of the martyrium in front
of the shrine of the bones of the true ascetic Rabban
Raya, the disciple of Rabban Cyprian, for the holy
Gabriel had commanded and strictly enjoined that the
pavement should be his grave, as it was that of Paul his
brother, and commanded that no monument should be
built above him. And so he was buried by all the
grades of ecclesiastics in all the honour of which the
majesty of that holy old age was worthy; and he left
behind in the world the fair renown of his strife, and
the sweet odour of his name. The death of the
righteous is not death, but sleep.
And some days after his death and departure God
* Literally, "the place which is trodden upon."
<pb n="684"/>wrought a wonderful thing. Two sick men vexed by
devils were brought to this monastery, and when they
had gone into the martyrium and had bowed down
before Rabban's grave they received healing imme-
diately.
And again a certain Persian, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="407"/> who was
hostile to the monastery, came and took away an ass from
the community by force; and when he had gone forth
to depart the Lord smote him with a severe pain,
and with an abundant gift he brought the ass back
here.
To God now, for. Whom holy men live, Who doeth
for the benefit of our nature everything which He doeth
in their lives and in their deaths, to Him Who hath
made victorious the early [saints], Who hath sustained
those who come next, and Who hath made mighty
those who come last, be praise, and honour, and adora-
tion, and exaltation, from every rational being who
hath lived and who liveth. By the prayers of these
saints whose histories we have recounted, may He
make His blessings to accompany this assembly in all
its crises, and may He extend to it His help, now and
always, and for ever and ever! Amen.
Here endeth the book of the history of the life of
Rabban Gabriel, the priest and true ascetic, and
with it endeth [the whole work].
By the help of our Lord, and by the support of
His power here endeth the writing of this book which
is called the "Book of Governors," which consisteth of
the histories, and noble triumphs, and profitable stories
<pb n="685"/>
concerning the holy men and ascetics who lived in
the holy Monastery of Beth ‘Åbhê, together with dis-
courses divided into distinct chapters, which shew forth
all their histories, and which was composed by the
divinely pious man and spiritual philosopher Mår
Thomas, Bishop of Marga. May his prayers, and
those of his master Mâr Jacob, and of the saints
whose noble triumphs he wrote, be a high wall to
all believers, <pb type="textAllignment"  n="408"/> especially to the poor scribe,
and to the man who had this spiritual composition
copied, and may the Lord God hold them worthy of
the remission of [their] sins in the day of judgment!
Amen.